If the government gets to rip out the heart
of ma Maori muha
and equity from the health system, submitters like me, get
to call it for what it is.
It's health for the right rich, cis,
non-disabled dudes only illness
complicity for the rest of us.
A couple of examples.
Being able to go find accessible healthcare
that meets disability needs
and also isn't transphobic has always been
a stretch in this country.
So taking away the targeted resourcing that ought to come
with the principle of equity is tacit acceptance
that trans disabled people will prematurely die,
as in they've already been deemed surplus.
So, okay, what about Tonga Maori,
especially those with learning disabilities,
way lower life expectancy, which isn't an inevitability
and would start to shift tangibly with annual health checks
and Kapa Maori services.
The struggle and early deaths of so many is manufactured
through political choices, like the ones in this bill
where targets on paper are the end game
as if they magically set about achieving themselves without
the resourcing behind them
as if outsourcing public care privately was responsible
or even financially prudent
as if we could ever trust targets
to be set ambitiously enough in order
to dismantle the illnesses of pake privilege
and colonized mindsets pervading the highest, the highest
echelons of healthcare decision making.
I'm Pakeha commenting as a lay person about
as far away from understanding the role
of iwi Maori partnership boards as I could be.
But anything the government does off the back
of urgently dismantling URA
and flattening almost any T protection that can find
while relegating cup Maori like URA
to an afterthought suggests to me
that the latest iwi Maori partnership role,
role changes will be nothing but tokenism.
Now, if I said that I can't stand that as
I might be called woke as if being awake now
at 9 0 3 on a Tuesday morning
and expressing my views in a five minute window to half
of a select committee constitutes anything other than a
prescribed democratic, right?
So I do my best with this window of attention
to oppose this bill
and b, in solidarity with the striking healthcare workers
and all those accessing
or providing care for whom this government is concocting a
system of illness complicity.
Thank you. And happy to take questions.
Alright, do we have, oh yeah, Lawrence,
we got Dr. Lawrence have a question.
Here we go.
More. Anya. Um, it's Lawrence from the Greens.
Thank you so much for that, uh, poem.
Um, I just wanna check with you in terms
of both your submission and what you said in just
before in your oral submission, um, have you seen any sort
of reports of the discrepancy
in terms of access to health for disabled people and Mali
and, and vulnerable communities?
Um, which was the incentive for having something like
that equity requirement?
And do you know
what then them would be the potential repercussion if
that equity requirement is removed?
Because again, we see yeah,
and hear people who said like, oh, just
because it's removed, it doesn't necessarily mean
that it's going away, but what would be the, the reality?
Yeah, lots of reports.
Um, if I'm allowed to send stuff through
to the select committee after I can do that.
But, um, there's one by IHC, um,
that looks at the life expectancy for people
with intellectual disabilities.
That's quite a quantitative one.
Um, there's been some kapa Maori research
that looks on like the impact of colonization within the,
uh, for, for Maori and within the health system.
And the ongoing Y 2 5 7 5 claim is all about that as well,
which doesn't have the report out yet,
but that's in progress.
Um, there's a report to B ourselves,
which is about the experiences of, um,
transgender non-binary disabled people.
And it's not just about healthcare,
but like, I reckon like 80% of it's about healthcare.
'cause that's the theme that comes through in the data.
So yeah, particularly for, uh, there's, there's stuff
by the Donald Beasley Institute.
There's a lot actually, um, for,
for multiple marginalized disabled communities,
which is the area I know a little bit.
Um, taking away equity I think will, um,
undermine the ability to actually get the resourcing there,
um, to actually get the, yeah, the funding there.
So, um, and just sort of saying everything is the same
for everyone doesn't acknowledge the starting points,
which are vastly different
and the different interventions, which also might have
and will have resourcing implications.
So yeah, that's, that would be the, um,
my understanding is pretty much a lay person,
but of what it would do to take away equity, um,
particularly from marginalized communities.
Um, yes. Thank you. Uh, thanks Chair.
Just a quick, um, supplementary on on what you said, Anya,
because based on what you're saying,
'cause the, the other, I guess, um, things that,
that we've heard is around the fact that, you know,
health access should be based on need as opposed to sort
of some of the other criteria.
But based on what you are saying, would it be correct
to also assume that, you know, when you look at equity
and the inequity that's currently in the health system, that
that is actually on the need base?
Would that be a correct assumption?
Yeah, I would agree with that.
Like if you're gonna look at where the need is accurately,
um, then you that does, that does involve equity.
So it's counter it, it suggests that, um,
this based on need is being used as a cover for kind
of not actually examining need if,
if equity is being removed.
'cause if it wasn't, you wouldn't take out equity.
It doesn't make sense.
Anyway, um, the tabs are, so now thank you
so much for your submission.
Alright, you have a good morning. Hope you have a good day.
Thank you. You All team and now L up.
We got David Gala. Good morning. David, are you here?
Yeah, good morning. Good morning. Thanks Carlos.
So you've got five minutes and the fourth is yours.
Okay. I'm presuming Carlos,
you have my written submission and have read it.
Yes, correct. Thank you.
So I don't need to give you, so give much of a background
to myself 'cause it's written there.
Yes. But I do want to, um, uh, add a few points
to that, um, already to the points I've already made related
to why we should retain
and implement the health charter and not ditch it.
So my submission specifically relates to the place
of the health charter in improving outcomes
and getting better value
for our investment in healthcare resources.
So the health charter sits alongside, uh, health
and disability commissioners, code of consumer rights
and the health Quality
and Safety Commission code of expectations for health,
health entities, um, engage with consumers and whanau.
Um, the health charter
is a hundred percent about patients.
It's about how we care for the people
who care for the people.
Because if we don't care for the people who care
for the people who will care for the people, Carlos, so the,
the, the the, the, the kind of criticism of the charter
that it doesn't mention patients is actually erroneous.
It's a, it's a mis a bit of misinformation there.
It's a hundred percent about, um, patients.
The charter is not a political document, okay?
It's not a political document actually, given
where we are in New Zealand with the relationships between,
uh, the employees and the employees of the health sector.
It's actually an aspirational document
and it's an aspirational document that was born out
of conversations with thousands
of healthcare workers over two years.
Those conversations included, um, ones with some
of the highest paid specialists in the country working in
private and public, uh, in the private
and public sector, all the way across
to people on a minimum wage employed
by third parties looking
after the most vulnerable people
in New Zealand in their homes.
Every single one of those people, Carlos
and the committee, uh, saw an opportunity
to improve the outcomes for the pa, the people
that they served, um, if they had better support
and were valued and have the opportunity to help redesign
and improve how their services were delivered.
So the charter is actually a hundred percent about patients,
and you'll know better than me
and you only have to look outside your window today in
Wellington or any other city
that our health services under enormous pressure,
our health workforce, too many of them are leaving.
Um, you know,
and a number of the reasons for
that are actually included in my submission now.
We're a very small nation. We've got a narrow tax base.
We cannot afford to have so many of our people sick.
We also need to get the best value from our investment
in healthcare services.
There's absolutely no way we can do
that without your support for our workforce.
Give them the license to that.
They need to meet the different needs
of our different population groups
wherever they live in New Zealand.
The charter will help you do that.
Implement it, don't ditch it.
So that's my additional comments, Carlos,
and I'm open for questions.
Um, if there are any,
Is there any question from our members?
If, if not, just, you know, thank you so much,
David, for your submission.
I think normally a short submission is this means it's a
very good, a very clear submission.
So thank you for your, for your time today
and, um, you know, have a good day.
Thank you, Carlos. Thank you.
Um, just, just be aware if you can see some
of our members putting their heads down
because they probably just tried to drop nooks
or write down some key, um, key facts.
So, um, don't, don't, don't, don't get too, uh uh,
yeah, we, we'll try drop down some nooks.
All right. All right, now we, next we got Brody Cruncher.
Hi Brody, you here Brody?
Good morning, Debbie.
Is Brody here?
I'm here now. Kilda. How? Yes, we can hear you now.
All right, now you've got five minutes
and the force is yours.
It will be quick if you can live a minute for us
so the members can ask you some question. All right,
Thank you. I'll do my best.
Uh, Koto, thanks
for your efforts on this committee
and for hearing my oral submission this morning.
I strongly oppose the healthy Futures pay Order amendment
bill, and I ask the select committee to recommend
that the government abandon the bill.
There are many reasons that I
object to the bill this morning.
I, I'll cover just five of these.
One, the requirement for political neutrality clause 11
of the bill requires to fatou order employees to be,
to be politically neutral
and adhere to public service principles on first thought
that might appear reasonable,
but in fact, it's deeply problematic
and is actually truly chilling.
The clause appears to require
that medical practitioners employed by T Water must first
and foremost serve the government of the day.
I'm shocked by this. Our communities need our doctors
to serve their patients
and the public, not a particular government.
And this is even more important if in the PR practitioner's
professional view, a particular government isn't acting in
the interest of patients and the public.
I'm deeply concerned about growing moves to undermine
and devalue expert opinions when these are
inconvenient for elected officials.
This is never in the interest of our communities.
Doctors being free to advocate
for patients is a critical safeguard for the public.
Doctors must maintain their rights
to comment publicly on matters relevant to their expertise.
And in fact, this right should be extended
to other healthcare practitioners.
Two, the entrenchment of narrow health targets.
I'm very concerned about the effects of clauses 21, 23
of the bill, which will require health targets
to be included in the government policy statement on health.
Such targets create perverse outcomes
and they narrow the kind of the view of the kinds of care
provided by the healthcare system.
These targets lead to resources being diverted from areas
of health that aren't being counted to the few areas
that a government has chosen to count.
This causes attention to be diverted away from the largest
systemic issues that desperately need to be addressed.
Three, the outsourcing
of public healthcare to the private sector.
I'm utterly incensed by the bills
and emphasis on outsourcing care to the private sector.
This will benefit only private companies at the
expense of our communities.
This is merely a way of funneling public
resources into private hands.
Private healthcare costs more
and sending more resources to it will continue
to undermine our already desperately underfunded
public health services.
Sending more public resources
to profit driven providers will also reduce training
opportunities for health practitioners, which is disastrous
for the future healthcare of the people of alt healthcare
as a human right and not a commodity to be profited off.
Four, the dumbing down of the Public Health
Expert Advisory Committee.
I'm increasingly concerned about attempts
to base decisions on the reckons
of arbitrarily chosen individuals rather than evidence
provided by experts in the relevant fields.
Clause 32 of the bill, which removes the requirement
for members of the Public Health Expert Advisory Committee
to have knowledge of and experience
and expertise in relation to areas such
as population health, health equity, promotion,
and protection to TGI epidemiology and preventative health.
These all sound like solid things
to require those on the committee to be well versed.
And we must have people
with the relevant expertise advising us in this downgrades
that this attack on expertise must not proceed.
Five, removing, uh, equity requirements.
Finally, for today, at least I'm disturbed by
yet another attempt to enact legislation
that removes equity requirements in public services.
We need to be moving towards health equity
and this bill will move us in the opposite direction.
I'm annoyed by the false claims
or false use of claims for equality which are being used.
We ought always to be improving access and equity.
This part of the bill is another attempt
to ignore obligations to the Treaty of Waitangi.
Our current healthcare system is performing poorly
for Maori, and this bill is an attempt
to lower expectations rather than improve its performance.
This is an appalling step,
and I believe we should have a much higher ambition
for our public healthcare system.
The people Ofo deserve the best
public health system in the world.
This bill moves us further away from that,
so employ the select committee to recommend
that the government abandons this bill. Thank you.
Oh, thank you. We got one minute.
Do we have any questions from our members
or if Oh, yeah, we got Lawrence. Lawrence,
Debbie can go. Debbie, you go.
Thank you. Um, thank you Brody.
I appreciate, uh, your, uh, your submission.
And I guess the question that I have is, uh, agree
with the equation of equity and quality.
Um, what do you see as been the consequences for the whole
of New Zealand if this bill goes through in its entirety?
I'm actually really concerned about it.
I think, I think it will undermine, uh,
the public health system further.
The public health systems system has been deliberately
underfunded for decades,
and we're at crisis point at the moment,
and that's why so many healthcare workers
are taking strike action.
And I think, um, yeah,
I'm deeply concerned about its effect on further undermining
the public health care system.
And so I really implore the the
committee not to recommend it.
Thank you so much and the time is up.
Um, thank you so much for your submission.
And now next one, we've got Rebecca Grham.
Yeah, nice to see you all today.
Uh, I'm here representing parents of Vision Impaired, uh,
and it was lovely to, uh, hear one
of our tahi Anya talk earlier, who is self blind.
So, uh, we are well represented today, uh, in my submission,
you will have seen that I had a quite, quite a bit of focus
around the TE Tribunal and the claims made there
and the findings instead.
I'm actually gonna switch gears slightly
because the New Zealand disability strategy has now been
released, released in its draft form.
And I have some real concerns having read
through the draft disability strategy
of which health is a key outcome.
And then reading this piece of legislation, uh,
and I'm gonna go through in a little more detail,
but at a high level, this piece of legislation
actively undermines the commitment in the New Zealand
disability strategy
and doesn't align with the key outcomes for health.
So there's a real disconnect there.
Uh, and this legislation will not achieve
and will in fact actively be detrimental to
what is trying to be achieved there.
So I didn't write about it
because of course the strategy wasn't
out then, but now it's out.
So here we go. Um, firstly, uh, clause six,
which reframes the objectives of te order
with a rather narrow focus on efficiency and performance.
And clause eight, um, which reshapes the functions of order.
Neither provision requires consultation with disabled people
or even with fa kaha Ministry for Disabled people
because this bill now omits to include disabled people
and ensure that connection, it undermines, uh, actions one
and two, uh, of the health outcomes.
It also means that, uh,
while central governance will be strengthened,
it excludes disabled voices.
And we know from history
that when you exclude disabled voices, outcomes
for disabled people get worse.
Uh, number two, clause seven sets out the objectives
of the health system, again, uh,
around efficiency and sustainability.
It doesn't deci, it doesn't include a clear
description around efficiency
because what we know in terms of accessibility
is efficiency means having
accessibility built in at the start.
And if you don't, it's really expensive to try
and backend accessibility across a range of areas.
So that's not included there.
Um, the absence of accessibility obligations in the leg,
in the, uh, payor legislation means that both infrastructure
and your digital health investments
and, uh, pro producing work that's not accessible,
and that costs more money in the long term.
So the legislation needs to include in it
relevant accessibility components to ensure
that efficiency includes being able to make both
of these items accessible.
Uh, number three, there are no disability equity indicators
and data and indicators are a key cross-cutting theme
of the New Zealand disability strategy.
It's really important that disability related
data is included.
Um, but, uh,
while Clause 10 introduces new health system indicators
and targets to be set
and monitored by the minister,
these are not disability equity indicators.
And even though health is essential outcome in the
disability strategy and data is essential part of that,
there is no requirement in this legislation,
which means it'll get left out.
Um, the bill emphasizes high volume,
highly visible indicators, but
because of the absence of disability indicators, it means
that the experiences and the data relevant
for disabled people gets left out.
This is hugely directly impactful for our communities,
and it's why we have data
as such a key theme in the New Zealand disability strategy.
So absolutely that's a disconnect there
that really needs to be addressed.
Uh, number four, uh,
key points, action points one
and five in the disability strategy under health.
Uh, and also around the principles include components
of dignity, respect, and culturally appropriate care.
There's a lot of emphasis in the strategy
around culturally appropriate care
because we know as disabled people
that there are elements there
that result in terrible outcomes for us.
If staff aren't trained in these kinds of competencies, uh,
action, action points one and two really dig into that,
but unfortunately causes 12 to 15
of this legislation restructure the Iwi Maori partnership
boards and their role in local health
and our communities benefit a great deal when responsiveness
to Maori is legislated and required.
Uh, there, uh, one
of our recommendations is there should be a new duty under
Section 14 for te order to develop
and maintain a disability responsive workforce strategy,
including cultural safety training
and recruitment of disabled staff.
This is a key action point in this strategy,
and it could easily be folded into this legislation,
and that would be a quick win, an easy win, but
because it's omitted, it actually makes it much harder.
And lastly, back to data
and evidence, uh,
clauses 10 on health system indicators
and Clause 11 on reporting obligations
do not have disability as a required category for reporting.
Without disability aggregated data, our inequities
and issues remain hidden.
Making them easier to ignore.
It is a very key thing across all
of the New Zealand disability strategy that we need data.
We need robust dis disaggregated data, uh,
for our disability community so that we can see
what is working, what is not working.
Uh, and so obviously we would recommend
that these sections need to be amended
to require disability related reporting.
Uh, and I, that covers the main key points
that I have very quickly put together, uh,
open for questions.
I think we've got two minutes.
Yes, we, we've got two minutes.
So any members got any questions? Oh, Lawrence, here we go.
Kiaa. Rebecca, thank you so much for that submission.
And one of the things I wanted to pick up on,
and you mentioned in terms of I think rights
for disabled people in this case.
What do you think in terms of, if you could,
if you have an idea of the interaction with this,
with the convention on the rights of Disabled people,
the UN Convention of Rights of Disabled People,
I have been really disheartened by the amount
of poorly thought through legislation
that completely ignores our responsibilities under the UN
Convention to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
And it's an easy win to look at
what are our rights and obligations.
We've had a recent monitoring
with the international monitoring mechanism.
There is a report there, uh,
that it could have just been folded in, but it's not,
and it's, it's really disheartening.
Sure. Debbie?
Sorry, Debbie, you are milk?
Is it my computer? Debbie, are you here?
No, it's frozen.
Frozen. Ye I think it's frozen. Yes.
So can, can I, can I ask a question as well? So, hi Rebecca.
We just want to know, because you mentioned a lot on data,
do you think the current rate
of collecting the data lead to be improved?
The challenge? There's some challenges with data
because, uh, there was meant
to be some investment in the data infrastructure
and health and that was canceled.
And so because that investment in infrastructure was
canceled, we stuck with some really outdated systems
and some of that, for example, uh,
if you think about carers New Zealand and the funding
and the way that's administered,
we got into some real difficulty
because the data systems they're relying on are out of date.
And that means they can't actually pull up the data they
need even though they collect it
because that system is so outdated.
So some of that is around, actually we need systems
that connect with each other,
and we need a data system in health
where our NHI numbers have the capacity
to include accessibility requirements,
but that actually requires a significant investment in
that data system
because of the need to have, you know, the sort of capacity.
Does that make sense? I've explained that very badly.
I'm not a data nerd. Sorry. Yeah,
I I I can understand just the way to, I mean, we,
we do have some information,
but the way to analyze the data,
I mean this, that's what you mean, right?
Mm-hmm. Um, but anyway, um, sub, so thank you so much
for your submission today,
and now we l up, we got, um, KA Jones.
Hi Ka,
Uh, You got five minutes and the fourth is yours.
Hi Ko. Uh, so I just wanted to begin
by, um, saying you will have seen from my submission that
I'm, my iwi is, and I, and I raised that
because it seems to me that the main intent
of this bill is to harm Maori communities.
And so as, as a Maori man, as a father of Maori children,
as a member of a Maori fano, uh, I feel quite personally
impacted, uh, by this, this bill.
And also you will have seen the other perspective
that I was speaking from, of course, is that, uh,
you will have seen from my submission that, uh, my work is,
has related to TE
and particularly thinking about the way in which Teti is
recognized in law and policy.
And so that's the perspective that I'm coming from.
I found it quite difficult to decide what might,
might be the most helpful things to say to you today.
Because in the past, I've, I've assumed
that select committee process was about
examining a bill in detail in order
to make improvements based on technical advice,
evidence from people with relevant expertise
or experience about
how the bill will impact the lives of New Zealanders.
But I found myself faced with a question,
how do you even begin to engage with a bill
that's not based on evidence
or even sound public policy processes?
Uh, a bill that's very purpose appears to be,
to reject public health expertise
and is designed instead
to pursue a racist ideology rather than improve health
outcomes for New Zealanders.
And, and this is a small point,
but I think nothing encapsulates this better
then the proposed change of the name
of the Principle Act from piora Healthy Futures
to Healthy Futures piora.
So while most New Zealanders are concerned about their
health needs being able to be met
by an underfunded health system,
this government's focused on a name change
and once again, sticking the boot into Maori.
Now, I, I would call that virtue signaling, except I guess
that would imply that the government's trying to look
as though it's doing something good.
Um, and certainly nothing good about this.
So I guess probably vice signaling might be more appropriate
for that change.
But much more importantly, this bill continues
to strip away mechanisms which are designed
to address inequities in our health system.
So gone would be the requirement for, uh, the minister,
the ministry, and all health entities to be guided
by the health sector principles, which
among other things aimed at improving the health sector
for Maori and improving Maori outcomes.
And, and those health sector principles
that are being removed currently, begin
with the health sector should be equitable,
which includes ensuring Maori
and other population groups have access to services
in proportion to their health needs,
receive equitable levels of service
and achieve equitable health outcomes.
Now, what possible reason could there be
for removing principles
that are directed at improving the health sector for Maori
and achieving an equitable health system
and equitable health outcomes?
What possible reason could there be except for an ideology
of racism and white supremacy?
So this certainly is not about achieving better health
outcomes for New Zealanders, um,
but I can't provide any more evidence or expertise
or insight on those issues than has already been
provided by the Waitangi Tribunal
through the extensive whole order inquiry,
or that you can see in the substantial body of research
from Maori and public health experts.
The evidence is all there.
It's clear you just need to be willing to listen
and act on evidence instead of racist ideology.
So I'd urge this committee to recommend
that this bill be rejected
because not to do
so would send a very clear message to Maori.
You'd be saying to Maori au to me, to my tamari
that you're happy with us dying seven
to eight years younger than other New Zealanders
that you are comfortable with that what's more,
you are making a choice that that's what you want
to cap keep happening.
So I urge you to reject this Bill Kia.
Great. Now we've got de de we got a question. Yep.
Kiara, thank you. My apologies.
Um, for the power loss, um, AMI
um, my partai to you is given your submission highlights
that the bill, uh,
further guts the treaty principles provision, uh,
in section six, um,
how do you see this affecting the Crown's ability
to uphold te and ensuring equitable
Maori health outcomes in going future?
And my second sub to follow that up please
through the chair, is do you believe that the Crown is just,
is deliberately putting, uh,
new Zealanders into a position
where there would be ongoing breaches of tei?
Yes. Well, I think to that last part, I think
that's certainly clear.
Um, and, and I don't think the the government has, um,
made any secret of that.
That's what it's doing. Um,
but in the first part, you know, what we've seen,
the Tang Tribunal inquiry showed really in that first stage
of the whole order inquiry, the impact
that these structural provisions, whether it's the framework
and legislation or overarching national policy instruments
can have on the delivery of health outcomes.
And what we saw in that tribunal inquiry was, uh,
a clear statement that continuing along the lines,
and this is even going backwards, I think from, um, from
where we were at, um, only serves to embed that inequity.
Now that of course, is bad for Maori,
but it is really bad for the health system as a whole.
Quick one, Lawrence. Thank you.
Cool. Uh, um, Calvin,
thank you so much for that submission.
Um, I want to tap into your academic background
and looking at more of a system perspective that, you know,
you mentioned this bill is not based on evidence,
it's based on ideology.
What then would be the repercussion of any, I guess,
government that continuously politicize public good
as opposed to, um, looking at things based on
what the people need and what the evidence is?
Because this is not the only bill, right?
No, that's, that's right.
And, and I think, I think it does, it does two things.
So, so first of all, of course it leads
to really bad outcomes, leads
to poor outcomes in whatever area you are ignoring
evidence, ignoring process.
And, um, it reduces accountability and transparency
because it's very hard to engage with, um,
people just making decisions on a whim.
You can't reason with them.
They're not based on reason or rationale.
Um, but it also really undermines the process of,
of government and, um,
their faith in our democratic institutions.
And I think we've seen this government has really reduced
New Zealanders faith in democracy
and our ability to trust our democratic institutions perhaps
more than any other in my lifetime.
Alright, thank you Colin, for your submission today.
I think the time is up now, so thank you
so much and you have a good day.
And now L up, we've got St.
Peter's on Willis Social Justice Group.
Um, Duncan.
Yes, I am, I'm here. Oh, sorry, I might've,
I'm trying to start the video.
Thank you. Um,
Good morning. You got
good morning. You got, you got 10 minutes.
And, uh, the fourth is your now.
Thank you very much on very, um, pleased
that you have allowed, uh,
the social justice group this time to speak.
My name is Gail Duncan
and I chair the social justice group of for St.
Peter's Anglican Church, a group of parishioners
who provide, promote discussion on social issues of the day,
expressing the social mission of the church by advocating
for measures to promote equity in many forums at local
and national level, including presenting
to the select committees.
As we are doing today, St.
Peter's and Willis Social Justice Group has several concerns
with the healthy futures prior amendment Bill.
Our recommendation is that the bill is progressed no further
on the grounds that information regarding the intention
of partnering with the private sector
with long-term agreements has not been
fully released to the public.
Quoting from the regulatory impact statement that due
to the speed of the work
and the need to hold information closely,
there has been minimal discussions between agencies
and no testing of the proposals with the public.
The significant changes between the health delivery plan
of 2024 to 26
and the health delivery plan March 25 to June 26
include major changes in partnership TI obligations,
and principles, which are more in line
with the regulatory standards bill
and characterize health
as a private business rather than a public service.
Our first concern is that most of the changes
to the ACT involve diminishing the position
of Maori at the board table of Def Aura Health New Zealand
to an advisory role.
Only even the change in the title of the bill,
putting the English First
and Maori in brackets indicates this.
The bill only recognizes the crown's responsibility
to consider and provide for Maori interests,
which is significantly less than the responsibility
of building a partnership between the Crown
and Maori required under the Treaty C point 24
of the regulatory impact statement.
How will the new 10 year contracts
and with private providers allow Maori
and Pacifica populations to engage
with public health providers in the health system
who will not be directly answerable to their advisory bodies
as they are under the current public health system?
Our second concern is the repealing
of the health sector principles and the health charter.
We disagree that these should be repealed.
The health sector principles
and the health charter ensure all sectors
of society are engaged
and health services are delivered to all sectors of society,
including the disabled, all ethnicities in New Zealand, men,
women, and children, regardless of their income or location.
In New Zealand, provisions of services
to the population groups with the most pressing health needs
may become discretionary in terms of,
of the financial philosophy of the government of the day.
Repealing to Maori Oro is very much like the repealing
of Timana O2 y hierarchy of obligations
and the resource management freshwater
and other matters bill last year.
By repealing health sector principles,
the government is choosing to ignore social conventions
regarding our duty of care.
For those who are sick
and our duty to support health services,
there is an assumption
that the private system can just pick up the overflow,
ignoring the fact that the private sector is struggling too.
The shortages of professional staff required
to deliver health outcomes remains exactly the same.
There is demand for school staffing at private institutions
as well as a shortfall
that already exists in the public sector,
which is demonstrated perhaps by the strike,
by the nurses today.
Our third concern is this bill does not specify any
functional intention to improve health services,
but rather move public health more into private hands.
The private sector does not carry the same scale
accountability and overheads as the public sector.
The overall demise of our health system is decades
of underinvestment,
and the solution is bold investment policies.
The obligation of government is
to deliver universal healthcare coverage.
Our fourth concern is that the strengthening
of ADA aura's focus on infrastructure does not assure us
that improvements in building and maintenance of hospitals
or building new facilities will be any more likely
to occur than it is now.
The refreshed health infrastructure plans for 26, 27
to 29 30 promised
to have certain specific infrastructure projects underway,
achieving planned milestones by mid 2026,
which means there is no certainty of ongoing investment
any more than we have certainty of new ferries.
Our fifth concern is the power imbalance in the governance
of health New Zealand, the Board of Health New Zealand
and the associated Infrastructure Board
both must be appointed by the minister,
which is a poor separation of power.
Furthermore, in clause 33,
the minister is removed from ensuring the collective
knowledge, experience,
and expertise of population health, health equity,
Teeter Radio Yang, treaty of Waitangi, epidemiology,
health service, surveillance, health promotion,
health protection,
and preventative health are present on the board.
It sounds more like a board of business executives
with no public health experience.
The focus on the bill on how services
and activity will be funded with a statement of health,
new Zealand's anticipated revenue and expenditure.
The fallacy is that they paid the public
sector at the same rate.
If they paid the public sector at the same rate they're
intending to pay the private sector,
the public sector would probably break even.
The focus instead should be on a comprehensive workforce
and infrastructure plan to provide care into the future,
to deliver free universal healthcare to all New Zealanders.
To conclude the investments
to really impact public health will require
a shift in mindset.
Rather than seeing health spending as a short term cost
with books to be balanced, it needs to be understood
as a long term investment,
which will require sufficient funding
to support a healthy society.
How we value health is fundamental to the economic success
and resilience of our TRO in New Zealand.
Given the significant impact the bill will have on the
accepted structure of the New Zealand public health system
and the obligation to deliver universal healthcare
and impact on social justice in terms of accessibility
to health, it is imperative
that this bill progresses no further without data,
which is soon to be available.
So we are told to allow informed discussions
and evidence-based decis decisions
with the necessary consultation
with all affected parties. Thank you.
Thank you. We've got one minute.
Any, any question for members?
Or if not, I just wanna ask a quick one.
So just now you mentioned that, um, the part
of the reason you, you, you, you disagree, um, some
of the operation give it to the private sector is
because you think there is not enough consultation or on,
or, or do you think increased transparency of,
of the contract detail will, will help you to, to agree
or to, to accept some of the operation,
give it to the private sector?
Um, I think that there just hasn't been any consultation
with the public about the government's intention.
If it was simply to, um, for the short term
or into the future to build between both private
and public, for public good, that might be, um,
a reasonable, um, well reasonable to discuss
with the New Zealand public.
But at the moment, the New Zealand public are completely
unaware of the long-term, um, intentions
of the government. So
Yeah, so I think increased transparency will help you, um,
help the general public to understand
or to to agree, uh, a little bit more, isn't it?
It's not about the public agreeing.
It's about you hearing what the public wants
and delivering the health services required
for all New Zealand's and also, um, committing
to your obligations to the Treaty of Waitangi.
Thank you. Alright,
Thank you. I think the time is
up now, so, um, thank you
so much for submission.
Now we move on to the next one. Um, McKayla, McKayla, host
Kra. Just gimme a moment
to get the, um, the video working.
Um, oh, that lighting is not, that didn't really fix it.
Oh well. Um, kra, um, McKayla is my name.
Um, I am mum to two young children in, um,
I am a descendant of Tama
and of Teka, who was, um, a signatory of t here in,
um, today On behalf of myself
and my family, I'm here to support my written submission,
um, which I kept very short and sweet,
and I will, um,
describe a little bit more my reasoning,
but I shouldn't make this much longer.
Um, I do not support the bill.
My concerns, as I expressed in writing are twofold.
First, that this bill will lead to worse out health outcomes
for every citizen of, um,
I'm concerned about the reprioritization
of politics over health sector principles
and the redefinition of health workers' obligation.
I believe that health workers' obligation needs
to be protected, um, their rights.
They, they need to be protected in their right
and responsibility to advocate
for patient's best interests without the threat
of being accused of political bias.
We need to see their responsibility as being
to their patients and
to upholding professional standards over
and above the government of the day.
Secondly, like many others, I wish
to live in a country
where all citizens would have
equitable access to healthcare.
Where culture and heritage does not significantly predict
life expectancy.
I believe the bill would be a step in the wrong direction
when it comes to this goal.
I believe that, um, the partnerships that we have had
between Iwi and Tura, um, have been part of the reason
that the gap in life expectancy between Maori
and non Maori has begun to reduce, I'm speaking, uh,
in favor of protecting these partnerships
and to hold the, go the government accountable
to uphold the pre principles of te
I urge the committee to reject this bill.
Right. Any of the members got an Oh, David hug. Go.
Yeah, KDA, thank you.
And I appreciated, um, reading your submission
and your appearing today.
Um, you've got lived experience of the benefit
of the partnerships.
What do you see would be, um,
for the chair, uh, twofold.
One, what would be the, um, opportunities
and, um, gains lost
of sugar spill coming from, again,
from a practical experience being involved, uh,
in the health sector and two, how do you see, um,
that would manifest into the sector, into the relationship
with clients, uh,
and as you said, undo the, the great work that you think,
um, has been achieved so far?
Um, my experience, um, in the health sector, um,
as a patient, as a mom, um, having two beautiful tamari,
um, has been that I have felt really respected.
I have felt that my culture, my beliefs, um,
were listened to
and my needs, um, uh,
were listened to.
And that, um, the health workers were there to support
my needs, um,
and to advocate for what was best for me.
And I know that they do a really good job, um, advocating
for all of their patients.
Um, and I
would hate for to see
their interest, um, to see them being defined
as though that they had to be new, um,
be, feel, um,
that their obligation was anything other than that.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Mala.
Um, if there's no more question, thank you so much
for submission and we'll have a good day.
Um, so we l up, we got, um, Jenny from
Ra Iwi Maori.
Good morning, Jenny
or Debbie, you still got a question
or you just
Good morning.
All right. Hi, Jenny. Good morning.
Morning, Morning.
Can you see me? Not at this stage.
Sorry. There's just a problem of the video.
Okay. We are just trying to turn that on,
Please.
There we go. Goodness.
All right, so we got Jenny and
Now, Yes.
Fantastic. All right, now you've got 10 minutes
and the fourth is yours.
Okay.
It's my privilege to deliver this oral submission on behalf
of TE AWA IMPB.
Our IMPB was established in 2021 by iwi
and Maori leaders, including providers,
and was formally recognized in July, 2022 under the
Healthy Futures Act as the IMPB for
the Tawa Confederations made up of multiple iwi.
And Hapu represents a population
of more than 60,000.
Here in rot alone, 46% of the population identify
as Maori, around 25,000 people.
If you are looking at a map of the bay, plenty,
we are the Geothermal and Lakes district.
This is our home, are here this morning
for our au Their voices, needs
and dreams must be at the heart of health system planning,
guiding decisions that will shape healthy futures.
These are our core messages today. Number one, protect te.
The ACT is one of the only modern health laws
that truly embeds this bill.
Strips those protections away
and reduces Maori to advisors only.
That is a constitutional regression in our view
at our recent national IMPB hu.
In Taranaki, we heard disturbing that
inside the government system, no one talks about equity
or anymore.
Some are already operating as if the amendment has passed.
That is not only disturbing, that is unacceptable.
Number two, don't dismantle what works.
15 IBS are already established
and operating across the country.
They are vehicles for RAN in-house,
repealing these provisions, dismantles mechanisms
that are already delivering better outcomes.
Number three, the bill will worsen inequities.
If you remove engagement, cultural responsiveness,
and independent monitoring,
you will reduce culturally safe care, silence, inequities,
and impose one size fits all solutions that fail Maori.
Number four, the data is clear.
Maori die earlier and suffer more preventable illnesses.
Dis bill risks making that worse. Number five, strengthen.
Don't weaken ibs.
IBS must have statutory authority to monitor independently
to partner in local design
and to appoint HA members accountable to iwi.
That is genuine influence, not tokenism.
Weakening IBS is a step backwards.
And for Maori health, crown credibility is at stake.
Number six, weakening IPVs breaches
and the crown's duty to actively protect Maori health.
If inequities deepen,
parliament will have legislated for worse outcomes.
So what are we asking? We urge you to abandon.
The bill will significantly redrafted, retain,
and strengthen protections.
IMPB powers
and the co-design mechanisms do not reduce Maori
to consultation only.
And remember, until change, the pilot act remains the law.
Health New Zealand must comply with it.
Now I wanna talk about some local examples
and realities has already built strong
partnerships with ROT Hospital, the local PHO, ura,
Maori providers, public health,
and the community leaders collective.
We've embedded local priorities into regional health plans,
and we have an ear to the ground with our whanau voice team
that has real momentum.
Our plans are locally grounded, evidence-based,
and are action focused.
They set clear priorities and they track progress.
But despite these gains, inequities remain stark.
As we all know, health status varies across the country
because every region is different
and health solutions must reflect those differences.
Here are some of those differences.
Life expectancy for Tam Maori Maori children,
life expectancy is around seven years shorter than
for non Maori children.
That alone is shocking,
but here in Maori,
children live in additional 2.6 years less than
Maori children elsewhere.
That tells us that inequities are not only systemic,
but deeply localized.
Strengthening IBS is vital, so support reaches whanau
where it counts, which is here at home
on the matter of suicide.
The picture is equally grim.
Maori youth have the highest suicide rates in the world
age 15 to 19.
Suicide is the leading cause of death in the past year
has been especially among young Maori males.
I don't say a young Maori men
because some of them aren't even
men, they're not old enough.
Each of these statistics represents heartbroken, whanau,
grieving communities and shattered dreams.
But we know many answers lie within wau
themselves and communities.
And so IBS must support them
and ensure solutions are co-designed to fit the unique needs
of this community.
Childhood in childhood immunization rates
for Tam Maori are among the lowest in the country.
This is not simply about parental choice.
It reflects access, barriers, poverty pressures,
and a system that too often fails to reach wau.
Our IMPB has already partnered
with the PHO drawing on local research into vaccine
hesitancy amongst Maori wau.
And together we are developing a debunking strategy
to address misinformation and to rebuild trust.
This is a clear example of why solutions must be local
and co-designed because whanau realities here are different
and the answers must fit our, I wanna talk about cancer
because cancer highlights another inequity.
Fewer than 60% of wahine Maori in are up to date
with cervical and breast screening.
Worse than the national equity gap,
this reflects some deep barriers that only place-based
approaches can fix faster treatment targets,
new medicines, and refreshed.
Cancer strategies by the government are positive steps,
but they only save lives.
If cancers are caught early without lifting screening rates
for wahine Maori here, those benefits will continue
to bypass our community.
These are our recommendations to the committee,
reject the bill as drafted
or at a minimum, restore and strengthen.
The IMPB legislative mandate require Health New Zealand
to engage directly with IBS for planning and commissioning.
Clarify and strengthen HAC accountability to iwi through
ibs and ensure national targets align with local realities
to improve Maori outcomes.
To sum up the,
our region has high deprivation, high homelessness,
high suicide, low screening, low immunization,
and low life expectancy, and we require tailored solutions.
MPB is ready to lead locally by monitoring outcomes
and co-designing solutions that lift Maori health
and benefit all New Zealanders.
We urge the committee to ensure the legislation honors
and empowers iwi Maori partnership boards
because our family, especially
our depend on it.
Thank you for your time and attention this morning.
Thank you de
Thank you through the chair.
Um, two questions. One primary and one sub.
Um, uh, thank you first for explaining all the solutions,
uh, that you are, uh, contending with.
One of the things that it strikes that you have access to
a lot of data, um,
and you've recommended investment in data infrastructure
and better access, uh, to timely, um,
disaggregated data.
Can you outline the types of data most critical
for iwi Maori partnership boards
to monitor her order Maori outcomes effectively?
And my supplementary is also you've mentioned, um,
HA and the fact
that it feels like the piata changes have come in.
Could you please, um, clarify what the relationship with HAC
and awa, uh,
iwi Maori partnership Maori board is like also?
Okay, so firstly to the data,
what we do have is a very specific
understanding of our community.
Okay? So we've all, we're all born and bred here.
We all understand it.
We know every provider, every service
that's going on in, in our community.
And we have also, as part of the IMPB,
which is a hapu
and iwi, um, collective, you know,
so we can rely on that information.
We actually need more data.
All the data that I've talked about today
is publicly available data.
So we, um, part of our issue, I suppose with
is that we need timely data,
and that's where a lot of it sits.
What we do have is a relationship with our, with our PHO,
with the biggest PHO and, um, for access to their data now.
So what we want data on is, is
where the system is failing us, continues to fail us so
that we can put some energy into that space.
Um, what was the second question?
The H-A-I-M-P-B relationship. I, yeah. Okay.
So, um, there is no relationship, there is no relationship
between HA and IMPB.
For us, we see HAC playing a national oversight role,
but the IMPB, uh, you know, is the mechanism on the ground
and regionally to do the work there.
Um, our disappointment with HA is
that it is just a ministerial appointed advisory committee,
so, you know, can be ignored
and certainly not accountable at this stage to,
to ha and iwi.
So, um, if we, you know, the dream would be to,
for I PBS to have majority appointment, uh, actually rights
to HA and then we would see that accountability.
Back to, um, back to,
Thank you Jenny. I think
the time is up. Sorry, Johanna.
I mean, uh, probably can ask the question now.
So thank you for your submission.
And now we got, um, honey winter from to
Iwi Maori partnership book.
Thank you. Um,
my name is Honey Winter
and together with ro, we, the co-chairs,
um, URA of te
Thank you for coming.
Now you've got 10 minutes and the force is yours,
right?
I think there's some internet.
Yeah. Um, so, um, honey is located in
and the, um, internet connection can often be interrupted
and there is, uh, serious weather, um,
conditions happening outside.
And I did have her, um, something to read, um,
from her and share.
So, uh, the opening comments is that
We, oh, she's here now. She's here again now.
Yeah, sorry. Yes.
Dropped off there. Um, where am I?
Um, yeah.
So, um, we are mandated, um, iwi Maori partnership board
that exists to bring the voices of Wao, hapu,
and iwi into the very heart, um, of health governance.
We have provided a full written admission,
and today we speak directly to why
KU rejects this bill in its entirety.
We also wish to make clear that the timing
for hearings is less than ideal, given the first coronation
of the Maori queen, um,
is happening this week.
If the committee wishes for meaningful engagement,
then it may want to rethink timings of hearings to ensure
that those that are severely impacted by the bill are heard.
The bill represents a direct attack on
and the hard one mechanisms established
to correct generations of inequities facing our people.
It, it dismantles Maori decision making strips away
to treaty protections and seeks to reduce iwi
and Maori to mere advisors without power.
It is a retrograde step that will widen inequities,
erode, trust, and breach The crown's.
Fundamental obligations under
ti was deliberately written into the, to restore balance
and uphold Rana
and, uh, uphold Rana and held health.
Removing is not a technical amendment
as a constitutional portrayal,
the tribunal Y 2 5 7 5 found that the crown's failure
to design a ti um,
compliant health system is pri is a primary cause
of persistent inequities.
The, the evidence is undeniable.
Maori lives seven to eight years less than non Maori
and suffer disproportionately high rates
of preventable illness.
The existence of IBS seeks
to reduce the harsh statistics.
Less sick people in our health system is good for everyone.
Why would the government seek to remove something
that works, um, uh, that work?
Uh, why would, sorry.
Why would the government seek to remove something
that works is beyond us?
We know that Copa Maori services deliver results.
They improve access, engagement and outcomes.
This bill puts those proven gains at risk.
Since our establishment, KU has demonstrated the power
of IMPB, we produce produced a community health plan,
administer request with bold, measurable goals
to close inequities.
We delivered numerous wano voice reports,
putting the lived experience of wano
and patients directly into system design.
We built a monitoring framework holding the system
accountable for real outcomes.
We pain, we maintain direct ana relationship
with the fat leaders, ensuring decisions are grounded
and partnership not bureaucracy.
We are not a, we are not a burden on the system.
We are at solutions.
We bring accountability, innovation, and partnership.
If the minister wants better results per patient,
then we are central to the solution, not the problem.
The bill will strip us of a genuine influence, relegating us
to feeding advice into a distant committee, to,
to an even more distant system.
This does not constitute meaningful engagement
as outlined in the regulatory, um,
impact statement for the bill.
In fact, we have no engagement meaningful or
otherwise, uh, on this bill.
We found out at the same time of the Ministry
of Health anti order officials about these changes.
We were in a collective meeting
with ministry officials when the bill was
introduced to the house.
We were sidelined, almost silenced.
When we have committed to upholding our end of
to be good partners, all we want is to be heard.
And that is in the big ask right now.
We sit at the decision making table.
That direct accountable relationship works
by inserting extra bureaucracy,
the board silence Maori voices, weak can, oversight
and distant decisions from those most affected.
We support the existence of HE,
but not at the expense of ibs.
Our position, our position is clear.
IBS must have statutory authority to appoint the majority
of HA members.
HAC must be legally required to consider and act on IMPB.
Advice, engagement must be regular binding, grounded
ina not reduced, um,
to token consultation without this
HAC risk becoming a buffer that dilutes Maori voices instead
of amplifying them cons.
Consolidating health strategy may have merited,
but only if Iwi, hapu
and IBS sit at the decision making table.
The removal of dedicated Maori health strategy health
strategy is unacceptable.
It signals the crown's intention
to sideline Maori health priorities.
We simply don't accept that one health strategy will deliver
for everyone regardless of their race.
The fact is that Maori die.
The fact is that Maori die early than anyone
else in this country.
That is fact and dedicated government intervention
and resource is required to address it
simply bunching us in the majority of New Zealanders sends
majority of New Zealand sends a signal
that our unique perspectives and needs are being sidelined.
Effective partnership demands more than
surface level engagement.
It requires real authority, transparent processes,
and shared power at every level of decision making
stands with every IMPB in the MuTu,
we wholeheartedly reject the healthy, uh, futures bill.
If Parliament insists on proceeding,
the legislation must retain
and strengthen the, uh, protections,
independent monitoring powers co-design
and co-decision mechanism.
Anything less is a bri ti
and will deepen inequities for generations.
We have shown that when Iwi ano are genuine partners,
the health system performs better, not just for Maori,
but for all New Zealanders.
This bill tears down the progress Maku calls on the Crown
to honor ti respect partnership
and protect the mechanisms that give Maori the power
to shape our own health futures.
We thank you for the opportunity to speak,
um, to the committee.
Thank you so much. We got Christian from Debbie,
Kira, thank you for the chair.
Um, my question, uh, is, uh,
about, um, given tomato's current programs, um,
which are excellent and, uh, they've directly informed
TA's view they drive, um, system improvements.
What mechanisms
or legislative protections should be retained
or strengthened to ensure
that every Maori partnership boards continue to have, um,
manana participation in every decision making?
I'm not sure who's answering or Elijah
More Thanks for the question.
I think right now, te have an obligation within the act
to engage with us on matters that are important
to te re remove.
The, the bill is removing that obligation of them to engage.
So it's the first part. The second part is
that they also have an obligation
to include us in commissioning.
That is how their services are delivered,
run, designed, et cetera.
That obligation is currently in the act and it works.
Removing that means we have no say,
we are not involved in the decision making.
We are merely advising, and
therefore we don't even know if our advice
is going to be heated or not.
So the mechanism that currently in the,
in the act, they must remain.
Otherwise, we are not going to have the opportunity to make,
to reduce those inequities, not just for Maori,
but for all patients, because less sick people in the
system, it's good for everyone.
Kda, thank you. Thank you for your submission
and thank now next week, uh, Rebecca Grham again
for her personal submission.
Once again, thank you so much
for your submission, honey Waiting.
Kda. Thank You. Thank you. Welcome.
Oh, KDA, I've changed my background.
This is just from me as a person to make that clear.
Uh, and the reason I wanted
to make a personal submission is I did want to talk about my
personal experiences and the concerns with this bill.
Um, so I'm a registered community psychologist, uh, so
of course solidarity
with the health professionals striking today.
Uh, and I've also been involved in several research projects
around health as well as that, uh, my husband is Maori
and my children are Maori, uh,
and they look, uh, visibly Maori, which means, uh,
when you look at them, there is no, uh,
wondering about their heritage.
They look Maori in terms of health.
Over the years, this has created some
interesting situations.
I've had health staff ask me if I'm the foster mother
and express surprise when I've said, no.
I am the birth mother.
I have had health professionals, uh, treat my husband
and family members poorly
and seen the significant shift shift in tone
and attitude when I'm in the room.
I have heard health staff as part of my research projects
justify to me why they do not
offer Maori wau the entitlements
and supports that they're legally entitled to these.
This in particular,
the last one has happened more than once,
and it is specifically directed at Maori.
In addition, uh, the examples I've given were
overseas trained workers who were not akha,
who were directing racism towards Maori whanau.
And I do want to be really clear in terms
of my own experience
and in the research work I've done that
Maori whanau are at risk from overseas trained workers
who do not understand Maori,
who do not understand indigenous ways of being
and who have not had training in those areas.
And the concern I have from that understanding
and seeing what's in the bill is
that this bill paves the way for us
to bring in overseas trained workers who then do not have
to, uh, participate in cultural competency, uh,
or training in that regard.
And this results in poorer outcomes
for Maori by poor outcomes.
One of the things health does beautifully is it
uses euphemisms.
It talks about things like adverse outcomes
that Maori are at greater risk of adverse outcomes.
When we talk about adverse outcomes
and poorer outcomes, we are talking about people dying As,
as a previous emitters said, Maori die at rates
and ages that are not acceptable
for any other demographic group.
On top of that, Maori are more likely
to have an adverse outcome which results in
significant disability.
So this is because of the racism towards Maori in the health
system, and this occurs across a range of areas.
It results in poor care.
It is staff who aren't trained
and who don't ask the right questions,
and so they misinterpret the responses.
Uh, we know from the health data
that Maori in particular are not referred in a timely manner
to see specialists or to receive specialist care.
We know that they tend to get referred later when diseases
are more advanced, and this contributes
to the worse outcomes.
We also know from the data what works,
what facilitates great interactions,
what facilitates great care.
One of the things that the PI Order Act did in conjunction
with setting up the Maori Health Authority was
to take the evidence, the data, what we know works
and put it into a legislative mechanism
that then contributed towards better outcomes.
These changes undo and unpick all of that hard work
and returns us back to the extremely poor outcomes
that we started seeing in the eighties and nineties.
I do want to be clear
that if change was possible on good vibes alone,
we would've seen that change already.
I know from the research,
and I know from my own experiences that
reducing racism towards Maori in health
requires legislation.
Otherwise it is simply perpetuated again
and again within my own research
and even in sharing my experiences,
these are often dismissed, demeaned, excused away,
and people look for any reason
other than racism towards Maori to explain what's happening.
That's why it's so important to have the kinds of
legislative approaches that the current
Payor Act takes in terms of ensuring
that Maori aren't just advice givers,
but are actually deeply
and intricately involved in accountability measures
and the creation and delivery.
I will end there and allow time for questions.
Yes, we got 30 seconds.
If it's not, I just would like to say thank you
for sharing your experience
and I'm sorry to hear about those racism
and discrimination you and your family face.
Um,
Thanks. Can I
take 30 seconds?
Yeah, sure. Go ahead.
Hello, my hands up. Thank you very much.
Oh, sorry, Rebecca. Awesome. Thank you.
Um, I'm really keen on understanding your view in terms
of monitoring the health system
and the gaps that are in that, that could be created.
'cause we've already got the structural supports in terms
of the health charter
and the health sector principles that are meant to be there
to look after equity, uh, workplace safety work conditions
for our staff, and also competency.
Do you think when we lessen or we weaken these provisions
and we are gonna see the repeal of the health charter
and the health sector principles, so
that could impact on the way that our staff
and our patients are going to be treated into the future?
Yes. Yes. And I appreciate, you know, carlos's uh, com uh,
comments and everyone is always very sorry,
but being sorry doesn't change anything
and being sorry doesn't make a difference.
And, uh, you know, everyone's very kind with their words,
but nobody wants to do the things that will force change.
And as you've identified, uh, who, Hannah, those things
that were forced to change are the very things
that are being stripped out and that is not okay.
Thanks auntie. All right, thank you so much.
And now we got Andrew Rido, um, coming up next.
Andrew, how are you? Good morning.
Good up. You got 10 minutes
and the force is yours.
Okay. So most
of the submitters you're hearing today will be covering
this, uh, will be
and have been covering the same concerns
as I set out in my submission.
So I do not cover, I will not cover everything
that is in my submission.
Rather, I'll comment on equity privatization
and obs obs sophistication.
So the purpose
of the PIORA Act is set out in three objectives,
collectively aimed towards equitable
improvements in the health of all.
It is, it is about much more than patient care.
It is about people staying healthy
and not becoming patients to the extent possible.
It is about equity in all health services to TE Fat.
Aura's first objective links back
to achieving the basic purpose of the PAA Act
and links forward to the health sector principles.
It is about much more than patients and meeting targets.
Equitable public healthcare is the essence of the purpose
of the ACT and of the objectives of tatura.
The amendment bill is seeking to change this already.
Effective inequitable public health
advocacy has been significantly compromised
to further the interests of alcohol and tobacco companies.
The amendment bill is furthering the interests
of corporate healthcare providers
by subtle amendments about prioritizing patients
and timely access to health services over equitable public
health for all removing public,
removing the health sector principles effectively removing
the avenue, the requirement for taura to achieve equity
and health outcomes are stated Purpose of the act,
adding explicit references.
Toura is objectives
and functions to private healthcare providers
inserting the requirement for targets to be set,
including obs, including an obsessively prescriptive list
of targets to be set.
This is inappropriate
and inflexible detail in primary legislation.
Rather, it should be left
as a potential monitoring method in the various health plans
required under the PIORA Act.
Um, the context for these amendments is the Minister,
minister of Health instructions Toura to outsource scanning
and plan procedures to private hospitals o extensively
to reduce waiting lists.
A recent and very readable assessment of this outsourcing
by the auditor General identifies a significant wider issue
with this outsourcing, not achieving equitable healthcare.
This is in large part the consequences of simplistic targets
and the lack of resources within ification.
My experience with the minister, the ministry
and senior professional managers of taura
is, uh, obs oxygenating over the real state
of our public health system, the underfunding,
the understaffing, the failing infrastructure,
and the actual extent of privatization.
Currently, I have complaints
with the ombudsman over the refusal to provide any details
types of operations hospitals used
behind the minister's press,
state press release about the number
of outsourced operations since January
and over the refusal
to provide any details about transportable wards proposed
for Nelson's infrastructure rebuild.
Uh, when the minister announced
that in a press release nothing had been designed
or constructed, um, I have sent a third
for a third time an information request
to the minister seeking the monetary breakdown
behind his claim that the 2025 budget increased health
spending, including on a per capita basis.
The numbers cited by the minister are different
to the numbers in the vote.
Health estimates of appropriations
only this morning on Radio, radio New Zealand reports on
URA being ordered by the ombudsman
to release information on nursing, nursing shift numbers.
URA had previously delayed answering the request on this
and then refuse to provide it.
You have to wonder why this observation
is seen as necessary.
What is being hidden, how it relates
to the amendments sought being sought in this bill.
Alright, Andrew, we still got a minutes,
is an oh yeah, Johana
Andrew, um, really appreciate your submission
because it was detailed enough to go into some
of the structural barriers
that we could find in the health system, um, moving forward
with the proposed repeals when thinking about, um, access,
um, and, and you know, because we're gonna see the, uh,
repeal of the health charter as well
as the health sector principles, um, in,
in this change in legislation, do you think
that these are going to be critical losses to the way
with which we can then monitor, uh, the delivery
of health services and the patient
wellbeing that we've been told?
This is cutting red tape,
but in my mind it's quite clear what the purpose was, um,
of having these awesome strategic documents
and legislative requirements.
Do you think we're we are gonna be put at risk in terms
of patient safety and work workers'
rights and safety as well?
Um, yes. I think, I think the first, sorry.
The first thing is that, um, the
health principles and the,
and the, um, charter give public
give pub give public reassurance about what is happening
and give and provide a, a useful guideline to, to fata
and to all, um,
health providers on what should be happening.
The second thing is that with the loss of that,
and I think in, in the important equity issue
is, is the distance.
Like I live in Tica, it is when,
when my wife was getting the, um, treatment I referred
to in my, in my evidence, we were traveling to Auckland,
it was at our expense.
She was, we were there for six weeks on the truck.
And that, and, you know, that's the sort of thing
that gets lost in the, in the simplistic targeting
and the, the, um, dropping of consideration about equity.
Thank you for raising rural health
and access just a little bit further there, Mr.
Chair. Um, so, you know, thinking about that lens in terms
of priority populations,
if we don't have the structural requirements of the system
to consider our wellbeing as rural Northland is,
do you think that it there's gonna,
it's a slippery slope now?
Um, I think it's, it's deliberate,
deliberate slippery slope
because I think the, the, the real, um, motivation
behind this is to increase the, the, um, well,
basically the, to, to, to, to increase the privatization
of the health of the provi provision of health.
And as I notice, as I, not my, um,
my submission, it's something
that even cropped up when you read, um, the as
as, um, being as, what was his name, Don Brah being directly
lobbied by health interests to do
what is happening right now.
Right? I think the time is up now.
Thank you so much for your submission, Andrew.
You have a good day. And now L up, we got a representative.
Is it reading? Sorry, sorry.
Can can't answer, but, um, so, uh,
we, we got a representative from, uh, now, now
thank,
Um, here on behalf of,
uh, and I've gotta take, um, my submission is read, um,
but also just make a, a few pointed, um, comments in regards
to, uh, this oral submission, uh, here on behalf
of the mandated I, um,
based in fba.
Um, alongside this, um,
aga also administers the Healthy Families Far North
contract, which stretches the length of ro, uh,
from RA in the south right to in the north.
Um, the dual role gives us a unique vantage point.
On one hand, we serve as the iwi authority for on the other,
we lead a health and wellbeing initiative
that touches the entire far north.
Uh, it is from both of these perspectives
that we oppose key aspects
of the Healthy Futures Amendment bill.
Uh, the position in brief is while we support improving the
health system, the way this bill proposes to do
so will harm our people.
Uh, this bill removes iwi Maori partnership boards, uh,
repeal statutory obligations to embed to t uh,
in cultural safety, uh, recentralize health governance
and infrastructure decisions.
These changes will disproportionately disadvantage
far north communities.
Communities already experience some of, uh,
experiencing some of the, uh,
deepest inequities in the motu.
Uh, the reality for the far north, uh, the, uh,
of the far north, uh, administered by the healthy families,
far North COPA covers some of the most rural
and remote communities in New Zealand, uh, to name a few ro,
uh, uh,
and many, many others in these places.
A GP visit can means hours of travel
and a full day's lost income.
Whanau face high rates of preventable, uh,
preventable illnesses such as diabetes, gout, heart disease,
and respiratory conditions.
Uh, poverty and isolation compound.
These health challenges removing iwi Maori structures from
the systems, uh, sorry.
Removing iwi Maori structures from the system removes the
very mechanisms that ensure these realities are seen,
understood, and are addressed.
Uh, far north, uh, healthy families far north, uh, works
through administering the healthy families.
Far North has seen firsthand what works
community up, community driven solutions, uh,
that are whanau designed, lead the change systems,
change thinking health is not just doctors
and hospitals at, at Iwi, uh, it is housing, it is Kai.
It is safe environments based in tga, uh, ma Maori
and cultural grounding.
These initiatives that connect whanau to tga, UA
and identity deliver better outcomes.
Examples includes high sovereignty projects, uh,
smoke-free environments, school wellbeing initiatives,
and copa that into daily life.
The model succeeds
because it is local, it is nuanced,
it is culturally anchored.
Uh, centralized models cannot deliver the same impact.
Yet this bill pulls decision making away from the community
threatening to unravel these gains.
Uh, Maori partnership matters as mandated I authority from
and the administrator of the healthy families
across the wider far north.
We know that iwi Maori partnerships are not symbolic.
They are essential.
We know why some whanau don't access services,
mistrust from past experience, the absence
of cultural safety
or services that simply don't fit the
realities of rural life.
Only iwi and hapu governance can ensure health delivery
reflects our tik, our lived realities
and our aspirations for removing iwi.
Maori partnership boards erodes Rana, uh, ignores evidence
that Maori led approach works best for Maori.
Uh, cultural safety is non-negotiable.
The repeal of statutory obligations to embed Copa, Maori
and MAGA in cultural safety is regression and Kao.
For example, some UA in Kuya avoid health surfaces
after being dismissed or treated without dignity.
Uh, in QAI we've heard
TKI disengaged from mental health services that fail
to acknowledge their cultural world views.
Cultural safety is not optional.
It is foundational for equity.
Without it, an equity will persist
and paya will be an empty promise for our people.
Uh, the recommendations as written in my submission,
recommends that the committee retain iwi Maori partnership
boards as genuine mechanisms for local decision making,
reinstate statutory obligations to embed Titi Maori MA
and cultural safety in the system,
support localized infrastructure solutions.
Our community health hubs based services,
mobile clinics tailored for rural context.
I recognize healthy families far North as a model of success
and embed its community up principles into legislation
and require alignment with iwi strategies, uh, such
as our own to ensure health policy reflects iwi aspiration.
Uh, ENC closing. Uh, these amendments are not abstract.
They will decide whether our atu, uh,
and can access timely care.
Whether a young whanau
and Q can see a doctor without traveling hours,
whether the aspirations of those of our iwi
and, uh, can lead, protect,
and grow the wellbeing of our own people, they're honored,
are not silenced.
We urge you to reject the amendments
that undermine iwi voice and cultural protections, uh,
and to uphold the promise
of Paya Healthy Futures grounded in led by communities
and delivering equality for all.
Thank,
Um, I'm wanting to explore with you, uh,
'cause we've just heard from Andrew and he's in,
and he spoke to the challenges of being rural
and trying to access quality healthcare services.
Now is your plan, uh, in terms
of the health and wellbeing of your population,
and what we understand is through Paya Healthy Futures,
these strategies were meant to inform commissioning
of services and focus on equitable health outcomes.
When you have put the work into UA
and you know, the significant barriers
for rural populations, do you think that
it's a Momo wa uh, that that it's actually, you know,
really undermining and waste of all that work of, of Ghana
and community and whanau voice
to structurally show this is the plan for the district
and now we have a health system that's turning its back on,
um, these local strategies
and then putting those, um, those levers in place for you
to monitor the system and delivery of health services.
I, um, and,
and I, I guess to to, to bluntly answer the question,
the truth is inequity is already costing, um, an a a,
it is already costing the system more and more and more
and more and more, uh, late stage presentations,
preventable hospitalizations, chronic disease management,
all strain, uh,
an already strained health budget and health system.
Um, localized preventive, uh, preventative models
are more cost effective in the long term.
Uh, for example, investing as we do, um,
as many we in the far north do in the in
to invest in marai based clinics
or community health hubs reducing
expensive hospital admissions, uh, later, uh,
kopa like healthy families, um, have proven, uh, and,
and, uh, Marai based
and iwi led clinics have proven
that small community up interventions shift long-term
outcomes and reduce costs.
Um, thank you for the submissions.
And I guess, um, just one
and a, a tiny follow up, a tiny is you are,
you've talked about, um,
what removing Iwi Maori partnership boards, um,
and what is that's been happening at a local level
where you see the TE based solutions like healthy families,
um, going how, and I guess what I'd like to understand
and maybe the committee, uh, would, uh, need to hear is
how you see the, um, clawback would, um,
the repeal, the change, sorry,
would impact at a real grassroots level, how you see
that happens from a safety, um, practices perspective.
And if you believe that the advice through HAC
to the minister is connected to what it is
that you see every day with the, um, that the doing,
Um, uh, uh,
because rural health is not a one size fits all, uh, in
the barriers to care are different from those in,
uh, and they're all different from those in re which are all
different from those in Koto.
Um, our iwi and hapu know these realities intimately.
Uh, we know why wau won't access services, uh,
what cultural safety looks like, uh, on our marai in our,
in our ua, and how to deliver it in ways
that make sense for our people.
Uh, without iwi partnerships, those voices are lost
and that rural inequities just deepen and deepen and deepen.
Alright, the time sub notes H oh, sorry, sorry, David.
The, the, the, the time is the sub note.
We, we, sorry about it.
So we probably can't ask the question the
Sub in respect to, do you believe that HAC
as a critical advisor that the minister keeps referring to,
see, feel, or understand what it is
that you do on the ground up there?
Yes.
Alright, thank you so much
and, uh, thank you for your submission.
And now we got Edison Eddie from New Zealand
College of Big Wives,
Uh, uhto.
Um, actually my colleague Tay Bradshaw will be
delivering our presentation.
Um, so yeah, I'll just introduce myself briefly
and um, then hand over to tap.
I'm Uhto Alison.
I'm the Chief executive of the New Zealand College
and Midwives handing to tap,
Uh,
I'm midwifery advisor at the college.
The New Zealand College of Midwives represents over 95%
of the practicing midwives in this country.
Currently, there are approximately 3,300 midwives
who hold an annual practicing certificate.
These midwives provide maternity care
to on average 60,000 whanau each year.
AWA has a unique and efficient maternity system model
which centers care around the needs of women, people,
and their babies achieving optimal maternity outcomes
for women and whanau is a priority
for all midwives in Al Tua.
Quality midwifery services should be accessible in Al Tua no
matter who we are or where we come from.
Providing quality health services means acknowledging
and working with whanau differences.
Unfortunately, the government's proposed changes
through the healthy futures Payor Amendment Bill
threatens locking in a one size fits all Eurocentric system
that has failed so many whanau across UA in the past.
These inequities are evidenced within the 16 Perinatal
Maternal Mortality Review Committee reports
produced from 2006 to TH 2024.
The research titled Warming the
for trans People in whanau in perinatal Care 2023
and the recent femicide report by TE Water to 2025
to name a few A one size fits all approach doesn't work
because we don't all start from the same place
and we don't all have the same health needs.
We can rectify this,
but it takes an approach that prioritizes equity, honors te,
and embeds cultural safety.
We acknowledge that the committee
and the chairperson has read our written submission
and we thank you for the opportunity
to provide extra information within this oral submission.
Extra support points for points one
and two under specific feedback.
Whilst we agree that timely
and effective service delivery is important, we fear
that there is a risk that without explicit equity targets,
there is potential for resource allocation
to favor efficiency over supporting all people's access
to healthcare and their differing needs.
In Tua, we see health inequities
that are not only avoidable, but unfair
and unjust equity means recognizing
that different people need different approaches
and resources to achieve fear outcomes.
A health system that this bill proposes,
which leans on equality
and a one size fits all approach will fail
to meet the diverse and complex needs
of our maternity population.
The Healthier Futures Payor Amendment bill proposes
to remove equity principles
and cultural safety requirements from the act.
This will directly impact how
to WHA order delivers services including maternity care.
Removing cultural safety is not a neutral act.
It will have devastating consequences for the health
and wellbeing of all who access care.
Cultural safety acknowledges difference.
It is the antithesis of racism.
It ensures care is appropriate
to the individual receiving it.
It is foundational to honoring the needs of UA
as well as migrant refugee disabled takatapui
LGBTQI plus and Neurodiverse communities.
Without it, we risk perpetuating harm.
So who makes up our maternity system?
According to latest census, start out, our population grew
by 6.3%.
Nearly 300,000 people between 2018 and 2023.
Housing insecurity is rising.
Median rents have increased by a third
and more people are living in mobile homes
or in improvised shelters.
Midwives see this reality daily whanau unable
to afford prescriptions, scans,
or even travel to appointments is rapidly diversifying.
28.8% of our population was born overseas
and some DHBs, over 50%
of birthing people are first generation migrants.
Gender and sexuality diversity,
LGBTQI plus communities are growing
among those age 15 plus 4.1% identify
as non heterosexual, 0.7% as transgender
and 0.4% are intersex, many
of whom are within the reproductive age.
Disability affects 14% of females of reproductive age
with higher rates among Maori and LGBTQA plus communities.
These are people navigating pregnancy
with long-term functional limitations.
Harsh consequences
of inequity are included within the Femicide report.
Published 2025 by HQSC
and all previous 16:00 PM MRC reports.
We know suicide is the leading cause
of maternal mortality in Tua
and three times more likely for Maori.
There is a clear link
between intimate partner violence and suicide.
The Femicide report stressed. These are not individual acts.
It's about systemic inequities, colonization, racism,
poverty, and the failure to respond to community needs,
which the current PI act enables.
Midwives are often the first
and only point of contact for many women during pregnancy.
They're trusted, they're present,
and they're trained to provide culturally safe,
individualized midwifery care.
But they cannot do this alone.
They need a system that supports them, one
that is built on equity, not equality.
As not all women,
people whanau accessing midwifery care have the same needs.
Despite these challenges, we know
that midwifery care improves outcomes across every measure
and that continuity of care enhances these benefits.
Midwives are not just clinicians, they're advocates,
connectors and protectors of whanau wellbeing.
To do this mahi effectively the system must support them.
That means recognizing the realities of deprivation,
migration, gender diversity, disability and violence,
and designing services that respond to these realities
with compassion and cultural safety.
A one size fits all system based on equality will not work.
We need a system built on equity, one that sees people,
understands their context and responds accordingly.
I refer to 0.3 of our written submission on the removal
of Tim is not just a charter,
it is a living values roadmap for how we care
for each other in the health system.
It guides us in building workplaces that are physically,
mentally, and culturally safe.
And in working together to achieve pie order.
Healthy futures for all
it's removal from the proposed bill is deeply concerning
and it undermines a framework that supports the wellbeing
of the health workforce, which is already
under immense pressure.
It promotes equity
by acknowledging the systemic inequities Faced
by Maori Pacifica Migrant Indian Rainbow Taka, tap wau,
young parents and others.
It encourages a representative workforce, which is essential
for delivering care that meets the needs
of this diverse population.
We know from the Health Workforce Plan 2024
that there is a 20% shortfall in midwives removing
to MO risks, worsening retention
and recruitment at a time when timely
and effective healthcare is a stated
as a government priority.
To MOO also fosters a just culture one
that learns from evidence such as the P-M-M-R-C
and FEMICIDE reports,
which clearly document inequities and harm.
Ignoring this evidence is a choice to accept that harm
at organizational, collective, and individual levels.
To MOO helps us care for the carers
value and support our people.
Define the behaviors
and competencies we expect from everyone.
We are part of a whakapapa.
We walk in the footsteps of those before us
and shape the path for those who follow to.
Moo is the foundation for our health system
that is responsive, inclusive, and accountable.
Its removal is not just a legislative change,
it is a step away from the kind
of health system our communities deserve.
In regards to 0.5, we would like
to emphasize we are against, we are agast in the proposal
of taking away decision making functions on health
for the indigenous people of Tua
ibs have an iwi based mandate
and with a legitimate vehicle for connection
and representation without an underlying commitment to Titi.
How is Health New Zealand to TU order going
to engage with Maori?
If the genesis of this bill is anything to go by with next
to no engagement with Maori,
to say we lack faith is an understatement.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned
that removing the requirement for board members
to have expertise, Maori
and Ma Maori will erode the cultural competency
of leadership and risk decisions being made without
understanding the live realities of Maori.
Finally, 0.6.
We would like to reiterate that changing the title
of the act is a shameless waste of time and money
and a direct insult on the indigenous language
of this, of this country.
And the original intent of the act, which stems back
to the Y 2 5 7 5 report.
In conclusion, we can always do better as a profession,
but we can't do it alone.
We need to collaborate with politicians, policy makers,
researchers, and our multidisciplinary colleagues.
We all need to be in this Waka rowing together toward the
models that work for whanau
and for midwives to be able to be midwives.
The college opposes the healthy futures prior amendment Bill
and recommend the government abandons this bill.
T
Thank you so much. Unfortunately,
we don't have time to ask any question,
but once again, thank you for your submission.
And now we've got op as Jo, uh, Johan. Sorry, Johan.
Your, uh, uh, 10. I'm Dr.
Joe from, uh, talker to my thank you
for the opportunity to present.
Um, my focus is gonna be very specific, um, clauses 21
to 23 institutionalized targets.
And I think this is folly. Um, the bottom line is simple.
If you set targets, you both obscure failure
and you divert people from success.
Um, clinicians will be forced to actually move heaven
and earth to meet targets.
Even if this actually means harming patients,
they'll be forced to lie and cheat
and steal if they have to.
And the alternative is to encourage
and resource people to re-engineer our defective system.
So it's easier for us to do our jobs and we can do better.
Um, you know, desperate people will try anything.
We saw this in the UK
and mid Stafford, uh, with the Francis report.
We saw this in Canberra
and I have two quotes I'd like to read to you if I can.
Uh, the first is from, pretty short from the executive
summary of the mid staffs inquiry.
Um, this failure was in part the consequence
of allowing a focus on reaching national access targets,
achieving financial balance,
and seeking foundation trust status to be at the cost
of delivering acceptable standards of care.
Um, the second is from Canberra where
a senior staff member fudged computer data.
And this is, uh, a slightly longer quote from her
having been constantly told things like, fix the numbers.
I don't care if you have to stand, go down and stand it.
Triage yourself to make sure they're,
they're referring patients to the walk-in center.
Get it done. I've told the minister that we will be at 70%
of patients being seen on time by December.
So make sure it happens and your staff are not able
to do their jobs and show no leadership.
I could see no way out.
I kept hoping that all the initiatives we were doing
to improve ED would have an effect on the performance
data and that I could Stop, stop.
I was gonna ask, so I did not alter the e estate
with any thought of personal financial gain.
I foolishly and stupidly did it in an attempt
to protect myself and the staff who I work with.
It's as simple and as complicated as that.
The idea is that if you institutionalize,
if you embed targets in your legislation,
then you are embedding failure.
You are removing metrics that are useful.
You are violating good heart's law and you're doing damage
and building it into the system.
So please don't do this.
Um, that's really all I have to say. Oh, thank you. We've
Got question from Ana.
Thank you, doctor. Thank, um, I'm really mindful that
minister of his generation as the minister was given
specific advice on the risk
and unintended consequences of, um,
implementing health targets
and potential gaming of the system.
Yeah. Where you reduce the focus of staff
to achieving the targets rather than across the system
and providing that quality care.
Um, can you speak to some of the risk that you see
'cause your frontline Yes.
And, um, and in these structural changes, uh,
to the legislation and,
and minimizing, really taking it right down into
a target's focus.
Now, do you think that we are broadly ping communities
and, um, and putting at risk our workforce
moving forward when it comes
to a targets based health system?
Yeah. Uh, there's no doubt
that I see this at, on the front line.
You know, I walk into the emergency department, I see I,
I've seen a nurse weeping
because somebody's about to breach.
They institute special managers to manage targets.
They actually pervert the whole structure.
So you'll find that certain ROMs are allocated
or sort of moved from the ed
so they don't actually impair the figures.
You know, you see all sorts of wheeling and dealing and,
and this, this will always happen.
It's in intrinsic to the setting of targets.
And even worse, you, you think you're doing okay
'cause you look at the targets and they're being met.
But it's, if, if you look behind the data, um, then you see
all sorts of shenanigans going on simply to
meet targets while patients are suffering in consequence.
It's a, it's a a silly, silly thing.
We see it around the world, we see it New Zealand as well.
And, and to build this into the legislation is
just, to me it's a crime.
Can I just supplement on that? Sure. Um, Mr.
Chair, we've got a bit of time
because, um, for instance, uh, do you think
that it puts pressure on staff
to focus on the targets rather than the quality of care?
Because we know that it'll be publicly advertised, eh? Yeah.
Where we're tracking as a district health board
where our departments are placed.
Yes. Um, so it changes the nature of health delivery.
Uh, there's no doubt about it.
And, you know, there's the, all the other bad decisions
that go with the setting of traffic light systems,
the league tables, these, uh, you know, I'm like, uh,
it would take me an hour to talk about that.
But basically all of those
approaches are flawed and defective.
And we, the, the tragedy is that we, you know, in, in 1931,
Walter Shart actually described measurement systems
where you can actually track, uh, measurements over time.
We are, we are a hundred years out of data in many
of our approaches to just managing the data
and interpreting the data.
Uh, you know, I'm quite passionate about data
and by night I'm a computer programmer.
And I, I can see that in healthcare we, you know, haven't
embraced appropriate approaches.
I, I put some of this in my submission.
You need to use, for example, Deming's 14 points to
actually understand how to do this better.
And you know, I mean that was the 1950s.
We are, we are way behind.
Alright, thank you so much.
The times is up now, but thank you so much
for the submission and your work in our
hospital or healthcare system.
Thank you. Thank
You. Take care.
So now we got Fiona
Boto. Yes.
Um, my name's Fiona Bowles.
I'm an emergency medicine specialist.
Yes. Thank you for coming. You've got five minutes
and the fourth is yours.
Okay, Koto. My name's Dr. Fiona Bowles.
I'm, I'm an emergency medicine specialist doctor
and the clinical director of FDE Emergency Department.
And I'm very grateful for this opportunity
to make this oral submission on the PI order amendment Bill.
I'd just like to say that everything my whanau from Tetto
Toro, um, particularly from Tega
Oranga said is deeply true about the inequities in the far
north and the amazing mahi those guys
are doing is incredible.
And it breaks my heart to think
that this is gonna be damaged.
I've worked in northern since 2019 having previously served
in NHS England and the Royal Air Force.
And today I do wanna share a couple of aspects
of legislation which I do support, um,
and those that I believe will have unintended
harmful consequences.
Firstly, the need for modern fit
for purpose health infrastructure cannot be overstated.
The current FDE Emerge department is outdated
and dilapidated because
of previous shortcomings in infrastructure planning.
And our new acute service block,
which is desperately needed now,
is still more than five years away.
So I do commend the use of an independent external agency,
which has prioritized infrastructure investment
and continuing ongoing planning based on objective measures.
Um, this approach brings transparency
and rigor to decision making.
Secondly, well designed to healthcare targets can
be a powerful mandate for improvement.
For example, the short stays in emergency department has
helped us improve our focus on patient flow
over the last year and a half.
And I am proud that Fal Le Emergency Department is now one
of the best performing in the country.
However, without further investment sustaining this
achievement will be impossible.
And moreover, this target is unidimensional.
It doesn't reflect patient-centered outcomes
and without adequate resources.
As the previous presenter said,
risks becoming a numbers game with people gaming.
So truly meaningful targets must be co-designed
with frontline clinicians focused on patient-centered
outcomes and be backed
by the resources needed to achieve them.
My third point is about in the bill, is, uh,
about political neutrality.
I agree the public servants must remain politically neutral
when acting in their official capacity.
However, political neutrality must not
be confused with silence.
Clinicians have a professional
and ethical obligation to advocate for patients,
share accurate information with the public,
and highlight risks that compromise patient safety.
It is in the public interest that doctors do.
So clause 11 risks creating a chilling effect
to tearing clinicians with speaking out
and silencing critical frontline in insights.
So legislations must continue to protect the right
of clinicians to raise safety concerns.
Fourthly, I do commend this Bill's focus on quality.
How I'm deeply concerned that it narrows defines quality
to narrowly the Institute of Medicine,
defined quality in healthcare as safe, effective,
patient-centered, timely, efficient, and equitable.
This legislation emphasizes efficiency
and timelessness timeliness,
but risks weakening both consumer voice and equity.
The Iwi Maori partnership boards are an extremely effective
mechanism for ensuring Maori voices are heard.
In healthcare, this is quality improvement.
Equity is inseparable from inequality.
As the Oxford Handbook
of Quality Improvement in Healthcare Notes,
quality improvement can worsen inequities,
if not deliberately designed to address them.
If we improve for quality for Pakeha,
but not for Maori inequities will deepen
and the country as a whole's health will worsen.
So we must listen to Maori voices.
My college, the Australian College for Emergency Medicine,
has made it clear that
to achieve equally excellent outcomes, we must understand
where the inequities lie
and which groups benefit from which interventions.
So health system reform must support not undermine Maori
leadership and rights to determine their own health futures.
Repealing the equity-focused principles strips away key
legislative support for action on these issues.
So for these reasons, while I aspect, I welcome a couple
of aspects of this bill, I must strongly objected.
Object to clauses six to 10.
Thank you. We got one question from hoa.
Um, thank you. Um,
having been on the frontline this morning
with our striking nurses
and healthcare workers, it's great to see here, um,
with the Health Select Committee.
Now, because you are a manager
and you've gotta balance so many things in terms of,
you know, patient care, but also your workforce, um,
do you think that that the repeals that are coming, um,
could make it harder for you in terms of that equity lens
that you are trying to maintain while still, uh,
achieving those targets
and that we do need to have a focus on patient care,
but also resourcing the system
to give effect to these changes?
I think a really good example is international
medical graduates like myself.
If you take te outta interviews when we first arrive,
if you take it out, we don't know
that it's important to the country.
We dunno that it matters. We won't learn about it.
We won't learn about Maori health,
and we can continue that colonization in healthcare.
I could come from the UK
and I could continue to practice in a way
that worsens the inequities.
Instead, the current legislation as it stands, has meant
that I've had to learn.
I've had to grow, I've had to embrace Def Tappa, you know,
and I think that's absolutely vital.
We have, um, we have the name, uh, te Kahu is our Maori, uh,
name for our emergency department.
And we have a beautiful carving in our coffee room,
which is the heart of our department.
And I don't wanna lose that.
That is my heart
and that's what makes working in Northland special.
I'm sorry, I'm gonna cry because if you lose this,
it's, it's just so wrong.
Thank you, FIHI. All right.
Thank you so much Fiona for your submission.
The time is up now. So thank you so much.
And now we move on to Nati, Nati,
Hindi, um, health Trust.
Is there any representative there?
Yes, you are on Milk
your press button.
Yes.
Um, health Trust, um, I'm joined here
by my chair, Ana.
Um, QEM, uh, jp, um, is here in support
of our organization, um, iwi.
Um, and and in support of being as the CEO, um, I'm going
to take the, our submission as read
and we'll not be stepping you through it in detail,
but instead provide, uh, supporting Cordero.
Instead, I will talk about why we are here,
what good could look like if we get the legislation right
and ask for your support.
Suffice to say the Health Trust
opposes the proposed amendments to the Payor
of Future Healthy Futures Act.
We believe that these changes lack an evidential basis
and have been developed without genuine consultation
with Iwi, hapu, whanau
and w Mind Nstitute, your Ang obligations, your obligations.
They risk dismantling
and essential structures designed
to address persistent Maori health inequities
and will ERO gains we've already made
for the original pay order reforms.
But you won't be surprised whanau by that position
because that's exactly the same kopa
and position that we held in the high court last week,
advocating, uh, against the Crown decision to,
with the disestablishment of the Maori Health Authority.
So why are we doing this?
Why is an organization that you all know for our mahi,
why an organization that is known, uh,
for treating people well, that is known
as a good treaty partner.
Uh, why are we in the high court?
Why are we here today and passionate about this issue?
The Reasoning Committee members is simple
because it matters.
Jeffrey Anthony Shepherd died at 47
after suffering a massive heart attack while in the water
diving for PWA to support his two boys.
My brothers who were at boarding school, hu Peter,
Maureen, and Shepherd Nie McMann died at 50
after a short battle of cancer.
I am 52 years old
and the oldest member of my immediate whanau
and based on my DNA, some amazing doctors at Far Hospital
and surgeons that've kept me alive.
And I have a beautiful husband, Ruben,
and a beautiful daughter Maki, who is one
and a half years old committee members.
Maori mortality rates are not a statistic.
They're reality for many of us in this room.
This is an important issue for us and it matters.
So what's the link of this kapa
to my mom, my dad?
We are all a product of a system
that has an authorizing environment
that created this, these iniquities.
And despite the actions of good people like Fi
that you just heard, uh, on the call on the ground,
the reality is the system has failed us
and keeps failing us for the past 180 years and more.
And then that's a system that you want to go back to.
When this legislation was passed, whanau, we celebrated
around the country.
We celebrated
because finally the authorized environment,
the legislation gave a legitimacy to
what we were doing in practice anyway, on the ground.
'cause predominantly we just try and ignore you, uh,
because we know what's right.
And you heard, just heard that from two
very senior clinicians.
We ignore you because we know that in that healthcare,
based on international evidence, on different models of care
for indigenous people, based on values that consistent
with culture deliver better health outcomes.
So that's why we hear people is because it matters.
So what could good look like?
Just a moment of self-reflection.
If I look at our trust, our health trust,
and let's just take a snapshot of the last year, 24, 25,
we had 4,200 enrolled patients.
We see about 3,500 patients a month.
It's been busy August, July, it's winter.
We have influenza everywhere.
We're up to about four and a half thousand patients a month.
We assisted over a thousand patients in
our alcohol and drug service.
We delivered over 10,000 whole order services over
and above our primary care.
We delivered over 8,000 immunizations.
We achieved 95% success rate and our Han order outcomes.
And we delivered Homer community support
from Luaka in the south to Hei Beach in the north.
And over to these services were spread across 65
contracts for services.
The majority of those contracts were based on historical
health legislation, principles
and policies, the same legislation that was the basis
of the Y 2 5 7 5 claim members of the committee.
I've only been here just under a year
and in my 10 years as a partner at EY
and PWC two global consulting firms in Australia
and New Zealand, I've never seen such bad commissioning
by the crown bad commissioning practice.
I found when I arrived at Nazi Heene that the legislation,
the vote structure, the budget allocations,
and then the commissioning,
which is usually down in a tier three,
created a contracting, not commissioning culture,
buying outputs with a KPI to get the money out the door
and then au you bury the sector in a reporting requirement.
That means we sink. I was also, I was so concerned that I,
I ran my own ruler over our contracts.
It may shock you to find that the average
administrative cost of my contracts was good.
14%, really bad, 22% on average.
My SPA staff are spending one working day a month completing
reports and on bad contracts two days a month.
Let's do the maths across my whole order,
practice primary care and outreach.
Let's say we do 52,000 patients a year across
210 working days.
That's about 247 patients a day.
If one of those days is taking up reporting,
that's 2,971 patients that miss out on our service
because we are ticking a box for a report that needs to go
to Wellington that no one ever reads.
It's really depressing, isn't it?
You'll be pleased to know
that when we reviewed our contracts, two agencies
actually showed a glimmer of light.
Um, and they had administration costs of less than 11%.
They were the Ministry of Social Development
and the Maori Health Authority.
Why the Maori Health Authority contracts were designed under
the Pike Order legislation.
They adhered to principles in this legislation.
They were outcomes based.
They were evergreen contracts two to three years.
And reporting on outcomes was negotiated
with deep consultation and evidence.
The Ministry of Social Development contracts are developed
in a high trust contracting framework,
which is outcomes based.
They give a fee effect to their program,
which contains similar principles
to the PY water legislation.
And ladies
and gentlemen, they have a level
of automation in their contracts with the implementation
of the first phase of the TE program
that rivals the private sector.
My point here is simple.
Your job as MPS is
to get the authorizing environment right.
When you do that, good public servants with great strategies
and tools to enable that they can get on with doing the do
that enables organizations like us to deliver the business
that matters on the ground.
When you get this right value in your lingo is delivered
for every one taxpayer dollar invested in NA Health Trust.
I I I estimate I return $3 in value.
This is a new to us wau.
Uh, we feed a of 400 for 1500 bucks at home.
We get the stores from town.
Uncle donates a cow, auntie donates to sheep
and our nephews go and die.
For ana value for money is how we run our lives.
Whanau, it's how we run our businesses too.
And that's why the Maori economy is outperforming the
New Zealand economy, not
because of some post-settlement magic Wang juju.
It's because we are high performing organizations
and in this one, delivering value across a company
structure, a group company structure that's in forestry,
horticulture, health, social services, housing,
and increasingly media.
So in summary, you worry
that these principles result in funding based on race.
Actually what they result in is evidence-based services
that all New Zealanders are flocking to.
I invite you committee members come
and sit on one of our clinics and talk to our patients.
They will tell you, oh,
the support I get from NA is wonderful.
They picked me up from my appointments.
We have a cup of tea if we need one.
You know, I rang the then CEO during COVID
because they'd just passed 10,000 vaccinations.
And I said to the CEO, Hey, I checked out your stats 8,000
of these vaccinations, Akia.
He said, well, why don't you come up
and have a listen as to why.
And when I sat down with many of those queer who had come
to the Maori Health Service, they said, oh dear,
they let us book a group service.
The van comes and picks us up. We do all our vaccinations.
We have a cup of tea, we have a catch up.
It's just beautiful.
So there the monarchy
that has shown the action in our people is attracting our
whole community, not just one race.
So on behalf of the moms, the dads, our Una
who have passed away too soon, I ask you humbly
to reject the amendment.
Copa, stop.
Please stop worrying about value for money
and start worrying about valu in our lives.
Your lives. Because you know what? Au we all met. K
Can't hear you Mr. Chair.
Mr.
Chair, unmute yourself.
I'm gonna ask a question because you are muted.
Um, thank you Tam for your
No, no, sorry. I mean, as
I say, uh, it's way off time now.
So we gotta walk onto the next submission.
You just muted Asian Family
Trust. I'd like to
ask a question of our,
No, sorry Ana, it's more than 11
Minutes. Very health trust,
much appreciated.
Love your work, continue
to deliver quality health services for our people.
Alright, now we've got form from Asian Family Service.
You have 10 minutes and your divorce is yours.
Thank you. Thank you
for the opportunity for present today.
My name's Dr. Cali Fang, CEO of Asian Family Services.
We are national NGO serving Asian communities across all run
New Zealand since 19 19 8.
We are proud to serve Asian community with wide range
of mental health addiction, gambling, harm services.
Across the motto, our mission is clear, enrich life
by providing culturally tailored evidence-based live
experience, informed care.
We welcome to the bill where we, thanks
for the opportunity to present.
I'm going to highlight a few things
that are written in the submission,
but also give you a few stories as well.
Equity must remain at the center of the bill.
We know the health sector principles
and remove of a New Zealand health
charter are being proposed.
This may look like a technical clause to be removed,
but the consequences are, are really vital.
I think we need to commit to those risk
that we know one size does not fit all.
Um, health system does not work for some of the communities,
including the Asian community,
which is really diverse in language culture,
migrant histories.
If the needs are not recognized,
Asian New Zealander faced barriers that delay access
for care, leading more demand on the emergency department
presentation that is inequitable, but it is also costly.
For example, interpreting service in Auckland region alone
cost $10 million annually.
Imagine if those portion of the investment can go
to early culturally linguistic tailor made primary
care in the community.
How much money would that re re save
and reduce the pressure on the hospital as well.
So removing those statutory commitment
to equity does not remove the needs.
It only removes accountability for meeting those needs.
The next one I wanna highlight is timeliness must
be redefined.
We love the timely access for quality health services.
But let me share a story.
A migrant mother who had just given birth began experiencing
postnatal depression.
English was not her first language.
Shame, stigma, and cultural language barrier has clearly
missed her in this case.
So she did not get picked up from the assessment
with any mental health issues
and did not access any culturally appropriate services
without any support.
Her situation got worsened.
She had attempted to take her own life,
ended up in the emergency, followed by overdose.
This tragic outcome could have been prevented if she had
received timely and professional interpreter
and proper assessment at the time when she was delivering
her baby as providing more culturally appropriate services.
With all the translated information, the outcome
for the baby and the mother and the
family would be different.
This is why timeliness must include translated resource
and culturally appropriate support.
And the interpreters access a statutory purpose of timely
without those dimensions risk missing those point
of large population like our Asian population,
which make up almost 20% of the population in New Zealand.
The third point I would highlight is a representation
in the governance matters.
Clause 12 ex, uh, expanded criteria for the board
and committee appointment.
We strongly support this
and urge it is used to increase
representations from Asian New Zealanders,
other diverse ethnic group.
When decision are made without those community at the table,
blind spot emerge.
Board committees must reflecting the population they serve.
They are to design the service that work equitable
and in practice.
We also seek visibility infrastructure committees
established under clause 20 to 21.
If the major health facilitates in Auckland
to be serving the population
where one in three people in Asian community live in
Auckland, our voice must be heard
and represent in those decision making tables as well.
The next one I will highlight the infrastructure
and private provider safeguard.
Clause 13 and voting opens the great scope
of private provider collaboration.
This must be carefully safe guarded.
They cannot be allowed public health priorities
to be really taking advantage
by the private commercial interest.
We recommend that partnership will remain putting the
patient in the center of the care the regulation.
Ensure the equity of accessing not compromised the digital
platform and clinical facilities and capital investment.
Must be designed from the outside to serve the diverse
of Altura people, including MA Pacific and Asian Rainbow
and other communities.
We all know that Covert has told us the system has failed
some of those communities,
and we would not want to see that again.
The next one is the data accountability.
The bill removes the explicit equity clause,
but accountability must not be lost.
We recommend ethnic specific K performance indicator in the
Health New Zealand health plan
and other statutory instruments.
With, with all those accountabilities, the ED data
and the system performance cannot be
meaningful and improved.
Right now, the National Data Collector System
are not faithful purpose.
We do not know what are some of the challenge
for Asian community.
And the data could not tell some
of the challenge within our
community for the health matters.
The evidence evaluation framework must be embedded in the
procurement through the program deliver,
and in the national health target to be met.
Accountability cannot be optional.
Conclusion, we want
to embedding equity obligation into the instrument like the
New Zealand health plan
and government policy statement, defining timeliness,
including translation, interpreter,
culturally appropriate resources to be accessible
with the time that are they providing the service,
ensuring board and committee reflecting the diversity
of communities they serve.
Safeguarding private sector's involvement
so the public health priority are not compromised.
Partnering with Asian ethnic community organizations
to identify infrastructure priorities to better include
all New Zealanders in this healthy future.
Bill collecting, uh, accurate disaggregated data,
embedding accountability framework, honorable members, um,
of parliament, the diversity
of our population is not a challenge to be managed,
and that is streams to reflect in our healthy system.
The decision you are making
through this bill will shape whether our system truly
deliver healthy future for all.
Thank you. Thank you for listening.
Thank you so much. We got Han first.
Um, thank you Kelly. I wanted to just give a mahi, Mr.
Chair, because what you've pointed out in terms
of health equity
that not one size fits all is really important, uh,
for our populations, like our migrant communities.
So this is my of thanks for you bringing, um,
forward the voice of Asian Health Services,
but also thinking about the broad range of services
that you deliver that are culturally appropriate
and you are trying to be timely and give quality care.
So it's a mehi from me. Thank you so much.
Thank you. We got Debbie. Thank
You. Um, and first
of all, Kelly, I want to also mehi to you.
Um, I, I I think one of the things that you've been able
to narrow down is the equity
and the, um, not being blind to ethnicity.
And I, um, want to meet you as a aka um,
also in our connection as Maori.
One of the things that I would like to ask you is the,
and I love how you worded it, the opportunities lost.
Um, if we continue down the path of a one size fits all, um,
what do you see for the diverse communities
if we stop being blind to culture, uh,
that the nation could be doing in a health sense
and should be doing with a bill like this?
I think we need to really keep the equity
by sharing our cultural competency
and culture safety with a wider sector, using evidence-based
research to really, um, train our workforce
to be cross-cultural competence.
Not only that, that make them feel confident,
but also giving them the toolbox to be able
to serve the diverse population.
The second all is we need to give people a choice.
So one size does not fit all.
We need to have culturally appropriate services that are
beautiful, those people,
and have a high engagement, no high DNAs,
so it's best dollar on return, and that's no brainer.
Like I said, people do end up in ed, particular Asian people
and are working in the hospital for 10 years and know that.
And so by putting a system in place
that are better serving in the prevention early intervention
stage, we eventually going to save money
and we are going to achieve healthy future
for all New Zealanders.
Alright, thank you Katie. I just got one question for you.
Do you think actually, um,
currently the Asian community voices are being elected?
Yes. I don't think in the, like I said, one point
in the board level decision making around the table,
there isn't, um, Asian representative.
Um, and so our voice is invisible.
Thank you. And do you think, um, in the, the resources,
um, to, to our Asian committee is less than other, uh,
other committees or other groups?
Definitely. Like I pointed out,
our population are growing, like currently sitting seven,
17.3, almost 20%,
but by 2043, our population going
to be 26% second largest population,
but the contributing economically for this country.
But look at the healthcare
and service providers only handful of services
that you can count and people are
accessing on the waiting list.
And without funding, even within our service
that we experiencing on currently,
we have 50 people ongoingly on the waiting list
that we just have no capacity to deal with.
Sure. Once again, thank you so much
for your submission today
and, uh, you know, uh, we gotta move on
to Asian legal network for an hour now.
Thank you. Hi, how are you? Good morning.
I'm well. You got 10 minutes.
Legal network. Um, um, my name's Darren.
I'm here on behalf of the Asian Legal Network.
We are here submitting, um, an opposition, uh,
to the bill just a bit about, um, who we are an organization
of lawyers, former judges, academics, researchers,
and community advocates.
As part of our advocacy, we provide you, uh, lawmakers
as well as the government officials, no doubt listening in
with perspectives on how proposed legislation can affect,
uh, Asian peoples, uh,
especially the most marginalized in our communities.
Uh, to this end, we strongly oppose, uh, this bill.
We also wanna to talk quite a lot of
what has been already said, especially from our ana, um,
Asian Family Services, um, Kelly Ma.
And we wanna take our written submission, um, as read
and today just focus on two main points.
The first is how this bill undermines ton
and why that's important and also, um, why this will lead
to inevitably worsening health outcomes, uh,
for Asian communities, particularly
because of the removal of health equity provisions.
Turning to the first, uh, 0.1 to talk particularly a lot of
what has been already said, uh, from those on the ground,
these including health trust, um, also Dr.
Carwin Jones in terms of, uh, what he knows in terms of the,
um, legal and constitutional dimensions of this bill.
As our submission, um, has stated, the focus for us is,
when you look at Article two as a constitutional foundation,
you know of guarantee, even if you take a treaty principles
approach to partnership, both of these things, um,
are severely being undermined.
We don't think this is good for health outcomes, uh,
particularly for Maori, but also
as a constitutional foundation.
Um, our organization is deeply, um, opposed to,
to backsliding in, uh, this case.
There are more than enough, uh,
reports from the Waitangi tribunal,
from researchers talking about the negative health outcomes,
but also about, um,
the constitutional shifts that this makes.
The Iwi Maori partnership boards are
a great example of that.
It leads to reduced powers to effectively
as an advisory group.
We think that power sharing is incredibly important.
We know that, um, when communities are empowered
and funded, uh, to look after themselves what, um,
and self-determined, um, their outcomes
and what works, it leads to better health outcomes.
It's beyond health that, that this, um, understanding,
um, uh, we can see.
And also as many submitters have also said, there are lots
of flow on benefits, uh, to, to iwi as well when, um,
Maori thrive, particularly in health outcomes.
So we deeply support that both as a constitutional, um,
and legal requirement,
but also in the health outcomes, uh, that will result.
So we, uh, oppose the bill, uh, in terms of, um,
why it undermines t
or why, uh, turning to the second point, it's quite clear
that this bill removes, uh, a lot of equity provisions.
This includes health sector principles,
the New Zealand Health Charter
and specific mention of equity
as Asian family Services already stated.
There are lots of connections as to why this will lead
to negative health outcomes.
Uh, for Asian communities, we know
that Asian communities are disproportionately, uh, impacted
by health inequities because
of the intersections that they sit in.
These are the intersections of, uh, linguistic diversity,
cultural diversity, disabilities, gender.
We know, for instance, that currently there are negative
health outcomes by virtue of discrimination.
One aspect of discrimination is colorism.
The darker that you are, you are less likely
to receive the healthcare that you deserve.
You are, your pain is less likely, uh, to be believed
by, by healthcare professionals.
And we need a culturally, uh, appropriate response to this.
Uh, that includes timeliness, that includes in some cases,
uh, translation services being supported, um, that includes,
as a, as Asian Family Services stated things like
partnerships with Asian communities, uh,
and groups in order to, um,
set up the appropriate healthcare, uh, that's required.
I really appreciate, uh, the comments that, uh, Carlos
and Cameron you both have made to, um,
a previous bill in relation, uh,
to the Piora Healthy Futures,
improving mental health outcomes.
Um, you've spoken about the importance
of rural areas you've spoken, uh, in terms of, um,
Asian communities in your electric car loss
that make up a majority immigrant ethnic communities
who aren't being heard.
Um, I would suggest that this is simply an extension of
that logic from, um, mental health into all areas of health.
And I appreciate both
of you having spoken about health equity
before, um, in Parliament
and really support, um, hope
that you support in the committee's report that any removal
of health equity will inevitably impact, um, the communities
that you both, uh, represent.
So, um, I just wanted
to make one note about the questions of funding.
I know there was a question earlier about, um,
are Asian communities underfunded,
quote unquote in relationship to other communities?
I just wanna caution that Asian communities are not pitted
against other groups in terms of funding
that there is an ability to fund collectively.
And also that, um, there should be a TTT based model
as well, um, as a foundation and also include equity.
I don't think it's one or the other.
So I just wanted to caution and flag that in, uh,
this submission.
Um, before I, I turn to my conclusion, I just wanted
to open up and turn to any questions
that the committee, uh, might have.
Yes, we do. I think we got HOA first and then Debbie.
Yeah, just quickly thank you very much
to our Asian legal network.
Um, you, you've talked about, um, some of those, uh, changes
that are coming in the amendment legislation
and wanted to really look at, you know, um,
the health charter as well as the principles,
the health sector principles
because, um, within
that health charter all developed from the workforce
with the sector, with union.
So there was that really good buy-in that showed
that we were moving together as a health sector to adopt,
um, these big principles and values
and the way that we were going to provide a safe workforce.
Then we've got, got the equity lens coming
through in the health, uh, sector principles by, um,
amending and removing, um, these important
strategic documents that had great lead in and, um,
and contributions from community and the sector.
Do you think that it's a missed opportunity in harnessing
and affirming the voice, um, that has come
through over a number of years?
Yes. Um, I definitely agree that it, it undermines a lot
of trust, a lot of goodwill that's been built up.
And that I think is, is also part of the problem.
That's one, one side of it.
Uh, it, it's already difficult
because there are enough reports I can send further
to the committee if it helps that, for instance, young, um,
there's a report from about 2022 that young Asian,
south Asian East Asians often don't go to healthcare
or lack access due to racism.
Um, there's enough documentation of that.
So to the extent that there's so many resources put in,
you've built up trust, now it's going backwards.
Um, that can lead to a lot of consultation fatigue,
which worsens future, um, potential consultation
and partnerships, also equity and addressing equity
because they're longstanding.
We know that issues of colonization are longstanding.
It takes a long time to build up,
and a lot of the gains that that equity makes is
compounds against one another.
So similarly, if you are going back
and forth, you lose that momentum, which is quite troubling.
Debbie, Kiara, thank you. Um, Carlos, thank you.
And, um,
my question is, and thank you so much for recognizing
that it's, um, not an either or is an and and,
and the intent of, um, when we talk
and we saw during COVID, uh, in this context of the question
where we saw Maori, Pacifica
and Asian experience some of the worst, um,
racism under a crisis in the, um,
environment of equity.
What do you see are the opportunities, again, being lost
by us not emphasizing the way that Titi
and, uh, equity can go side by side for everyone
that's experiencing it?
Thanks for that question.
During a crisis, I think the worst impulses
that have never truly been un unpacked
and recognized come to the surface
that's most definitely colonial racism.
And that's also racism against Asian peoples.
Um, we as Asian communities have
always been political footballs.
We never convenient. We've seen this all the way back in the
1880s as the scapegoat for economic, um, problems.
We saw that time and time again since the nineties.
Um, and COVID was a classic example again,
where our Asian peoples were blamed for the start of COVID,
um, during these crises.
And there are also economic crises happening right now.
There's cost of living. Um, again, I think sometimes we race
to the bottom for these sort of, um,
equality first over equity responses that seem,
that sound nice, but in practice are not backed by,
um, evidence.
And I think that's what this bill can sum is, is risking,
uh, jumping, uh,
and on that bandwagon, um, what this means
for things like Titi and, and
and, um, equity is
that these things can be either played against each
other viewed as well.
We need to support Asian peoples over, um, other groups
or, um, alternatively simply that those opportunities to,
to wear something like te Ang can be a really great model.
'cause it shows that of power sharing, right?
It shows how you had this interdependent independent system
that existed here before
where Hapu would re respect other hapu all work together.
Um, and, and there was no need to jump on each other.
I think the same idea would be a fantastic idea
and probably world-leading if that was embedded in many
of our other systems, um, as to how we, um,
consider difference in a really positive way.
So I think the TDT has huge promise that has yet been, has
yet to be, uh, fully realized.
You Welcome. Thank you so much. Uh,
thank you so much for the submission.
Now we cystic fibrosis, um, association of insect coming.
So we've got
Lisa Burns. Hi, good morning.
Good morning. Uh, hello.
Yes, you've got 10 minutes and here voice is yours.
Okay, fantastic. Thank you so much. Uh, 10 Kato.
I am Lisa Burns, chief executive
of Cystic Fibrosis New Zealand, uh,
and we represent, uh, over 600 individuals
and families living with cystic fibrosis across New Zealand.
Our community lives with one
of the most complex life limiting genetic conditions
requiring daily treatment, constant vigilance,
and lifelong support.
Uh, today I speak not just as a leader,
but as someone who has seen firsthand moments
of heartbreak and hope.
Our submission reflects their lived experience
and our commitment to equity, transparency,
and community partnership.
Cystic fibrosis is relentless
and it affects every organ of the body requiring hours
of treatment every day,
and often leading to early mortality.
Our community faces apologies.
Our community faces frequent hospitalizations,
invasive procedures and emotional toll of watching.
Loved ones struggle to breathe.
For many access to life-saving medicines like Tri Kafta has
been transformative, but only for some
children under five still wait.
Equity is not a concept for our CF community. It's survival.
Community services are not peripheral, they are essential.
And CFNZ
and other community organizations
are a critical part of the health system.
We walk alongside families
and patients through diagnosis,
through grief and through hope.
And yet we operate in a system
that often treats us as invisible.
The Bills current wording risks further marginalizing
community organizations by removing mechanisms
for engagement and transparency.
I will take my sub submission as read
and wish to highlight three key points,
strengthen community, voice and infrastructure
and planning infrastructure must reflect, reflect,
lived experience without community input, planning risks,
missing the realities of those most affected
support services in the community.
Fill critical gaps.
CFNZ provides soer social support,
emergency financial assistance, equipment and advocacy.
We fill the gaps left by an overstretched
by overstretched hospital system and underfunded services.
Services that the health system cannot always deliver.
Exclusion leads to inequity in areas
of high deprivation or unmet need.
Community organizations are often the only
consistent support.
It is our recommendation that there needs
to be established formal mechanisms
for community organizations to contribute
to infrastructure planning
and health strategy development,
especially in regions facing systemic disadvantage.
If we want infrastructure that truly serves the people,
then the voices of those
who walk alongside them must be at the table.
Two medicines, access
and strategic reform for people with cystic fibrosis.
Timely access to modern medicines is life-changing
and in many cases life-saving.
Yet our community continues to face delays, uncertainty,
and inequity in accessing treatments
that are standard overseas.
This bill is an opportunity to embed medicines, access
and strategic planning into the core of our health system.
Strategic planning must include medicines.
A legislative medicine strategy would provide long-term
coordination and clear priorities.
So our, it is our recommendation
to legislative medicine strategy
with multi-stakeholder input, clear targets
and international benchmarking.
Amend farm act statutory objectives
to include societal benefit, health equity,
and alignment to health strategies.
Prioritize timely access in the government policy statement
on health with targets for funding decisions
and treatment delivery.
These changes would ensure
that life-saving treatments like Tri Kafta reach those
who need them without delay,
without disparity, and with dignity.
And three, protect the right
of healthcare professionals to advocate.
Health professionals are often the first
to witness systemic gaps in care.
Their voices are essential, not political.
The proposed neutrality cause in clause in Section 11,
a risk silencing those who speak out for patient wellbeing,
especially when it comes to access
to life-saving treatments like trita.
Advocacy is clinical, it is not political.
Speaking out for patient care is grounded
in evidence and ethics.
Silencing clinicians undermines trust.
Patients rely on their providers to be honest, vocal
and courageous in the face of inequity.
Health system improvement depends on frontline insight.
Clinicians are uniquely positioned to identify
and advocate for systemic change.
It is our recommendation to include a safeguard
or clarification in Section 11, a affirming
that health professionals may publicly make statements
on behalf of patients.
In closing, CFNZ urges the committee to ensure
that the bill strengthens not undermines the foundations
of a responsive, inclusive health system.
That means retaining health sector principles,
safeguarding advocacy, and embedding community voices
and infrastructure planning.
CFNZ stands ready to collaborate
with government health professionals
and iwi to build a system that uplifts all New Zealanders,
especially those living with chronic
and lifelong limiting conditions.
Thank you for your time and I welcome any questions.
Thank you. Thank you Lisa
Cystic Fibrosis Association.
I wanted to touch on a couple of things
and ask questions in terms of your important role
around advocacy.
Um, and in the legislation it's proposed, uh,
to basically, uh, politically neutralize our workforce
and mindful of the need for both clinical leaders
and those in the health sector to be able to have
that independent voice to report
and to shine a light on those things
that they're seeing in the sector.
For your association
and those clinicians that are a part of your network,
do you think that we need to have some level of independence
to be able to shine a light on those things
that are important to our whanau and community?
I think that for us to have a really truly inclusive, uh,
health system that serves all people, um, if we remove
that ability, if you just take into consideration,
for example, the Valuing Life Medicines Access Summit
that we had last year
and is planned for October this year, um, that is a truly,
uh, cross-functional stakeholder engagement summit.
It is about all people coming together to,
to benefit New Zealanders, um, for medicines access
and to improve the health system.
If we take that away, we will lose the voice
of those healthcare professionals in environments like that.
Um, and I think that's really, um,
it could be really dangerous
because those voices are really valid
and they're important voices to hear.
Um, and so we would essentially remove their ability
to participate in, in important events like that
where their voices need to be considered in the, in the,
in the broader picture of, of how medicines are funded, uh,
and how they fit into the New Zealand health system.
So yeah, I do think it's important.
A quick supplementary on that Mr. Mr.
Chair, if that's alright? Sure.
Just wanting to also look at the importance
of strategy in terms of form follows function, um, you know,
without the legislative requirements for us
to look objectively at, at the population
and communities, um, and,
and having that equity lens, do you think
that we could lose focus on priority populations like
whanau, uh, impacted, uh, with cystic fibrosis
and others, um, without those clear measures
and requirements of the system?
Yeah, I think those voices are really important
and for a long time we have believed
that community organizations, again, they are such
an important and significant part of the health system
and we have huge value to add, um,
to the conversation and the solutions.
And I think, you know, for us
to really move things forward in a really collaborative
and really equitable way, we need all voices at the table.
And I think that that will, uh, will cause barriers
if we've got one group of people who are unable
to contribute to those discussions.
Alright, Thank you Lisa, for your submission.
And also thank you for your ongoing efficacy for people
with cystic fibrosis as well.
Thank you so much. And now we move on
from, sorry, sorry.
It's, it's fitting as, uh, the nation's, uh, thoughts turn
to Wai that we remember back, uh, the proverb of
there is of the needle through which the white, the black
and the red threads must pass the pie order.
Healthy Futures Bill Dismantles the intent of that message
by removing or diluting legal obligations within the Pie
Order Act, particularly requiring equitable outcomes
and the recognition of Ter tgi, another great leader
Regan encourages us to remember to remember,
I remember back 23 years ago the launch of Oranga,
which shaped the pathways
of the health sector over the last two decades.
And that in that, uh, core policy document of government,
it talked about reducing the health
and qualities between Maori
and other New Zealanders through effective partnership
and active Maori involvement.
I also remember in 2014 when Dame Tana brought a new focus
on pie order healthy futures, which
of course has evolved into the pay order.
Healthy futures amendment bill pay order encourages us all
to think beyond narrow definitions
to emphasize moori healthy individuals
wano order healthy families.
Why order healthy environments.
And fundamental to the relaunch of Piora was the absence
of avoidable or remu differences amongst groups of people
equities defined by the World Health Organization,
the government of 2014, which was a national led government,
recognized that not only differences in health status were
unfair and unjust,
but the result of differential access
to the resources necessary for people to lead healthy lives.
This was particularly because Maori life expectancies
considerably lower than non Maori
and mortality right rates are higher
for Maori than non-Maori at nearly all ages.
Critical in the national LED strategy at
that time was the importance of partnership, participation
and protection, working together with Iwi, hapu, WNU
and Maori to, for Maori to be involved in decision-making,
planning, development and delivery.
10 years later after that, in 2024
Ang framework published by the Ministry
of Health in the term of this government
marks those treaty obligations as a foundation
for both achieving health aspirations
and equity for Maori delivering on her oranga
and, uh, critically achieving health outcomes
for all New Zealanders.
Just a fortnight ago,
the Public Health Advisory Committee established under the
Pie Order Act provided independent advice,
which on page three, uh, told very clearly
that if we want a healthy, cohesive society
and a resilient, prosperous economy,
that inaction on health inequities has significant costs
for wano, for community,
but also for our health system and the economy.
And that that group, uh, set up
to provide independent advice to the Minister on Health
pledged that we must address the entrenched
and unfair differences in health, uh,
and that we must turn our minds
to the health inequities which are longstanding, such
as the fact children living in urban areas expect
to live four years longer than those living in a rural
community like mine.
That a Paia boy born in Waikato can expect
to live eight years longer than is Maori neighbor
that Paia children living in the north can expect to live
to 84 years, seven years longer than Pacific people.
A difference that has increased, uh, over the last 25 years.
Uh, those are the comments that I wish to make
and I'm open for any questions.
Thank you. We got Debbie. Uh,
um, so my question is in respect to,
and thank you, um, for sharing your maga, um,
I've got one primary sub please, uh, Mr.
Chair. My first thing is how critical is retaining
to Maori ot, um, population based strategies
and Maori governance mechanisms to ensure
that our Maori lead services continue to reduce in equities?
And my follow up, um, is can you describe specific ways,
uh, for you on the ground that the proposed will, um,
bill would affect au um, URA outcomes
in your AWA
and how this will differ differ from the current system?
Um, first, someone how to throw them up.
All these questions. Sorry, Helen. Sorry.
So firstly, why is it so important?
Uh, we are looking towards the future, a healthy future, uh,
where we're gonna have large proportions of Maori,
over a million people, young Pacific people, over 650,000
and young Asian people, uh, just over a million people.
One third of children in 2040 will identify
as Maori one in five.
As Pacific peoples, we have to get it right.
We have 15 years to make sure that equity, that equality,
that all New Zealanders are able to enjoy the best, uh,
health and wellbeing that they deserve.
And so that's, that's why it's critical where I can see, um,
it's can directly impact if Maori do not have a
say in decision making.
Um, and involvement in the health sector, uh,
if there aren't specific, um, uh,
culturally competent approaches to be able to
provide support to ano to be able to, uh, receive the care
that they should be, should be accessing.
If, for instance, uh, in a area like ours,
we have one health shuttle a day.
If you are a coia and your appointment in Wnu is at two
o'clock and you have
to leave at seven o'clock in the morning, who's gonna look
after you over that day?
Will, will you be, uh, fed, nurtured, cared for?
And will you, um, be able to keep your appointment?
Or is it just too much, uh, of a, of an, you know,
inconvenience into your life?
And so the, the reason we need
to have culturally competent wano ano centric approaches is
to ensure, you know, different horses for different courses,
different communities operate better in the settings
where they feel comfortable
and where they're able to give their full, um,
their full interpretation of what's happening
for them rather than
what they think is just a clinical response by somebody
who may not understand mental health issues
or issues that, uh, carry some, um, some,
I guess some awkwardness for, for people to talk about.
It's, it's, you know, it's that that access, that comfort,
that sense of belonging is critical.
Do I have time to supplement Mr. Chair
Or You're done.
Alright, Johanna,
Um, fire Helen, you, you've been around for a while.
You've seen a lot in terms of changes through the system
and the health sector.
I wanted to touch on what was raised
by Asian legal network earlier where they talked about
how it, the pendulum, the continued change
and focus, uh, undermines the trajectory
of progress in terms of measuring health outcomes,
but it also shifts the focus constantly for providers
and, um, for the health sector.
Do you think, uh, genuinely that we need some stability
in terms of committing bipartisan
across the political spectrum to something
that we can commit to for a good period of time
to finally measure those health outcomes, which embeds t
but also health equity.
Not all of us come from the same community.
All of us have different places where we start and um,
and hearing that that young lawyer come forward
and say, we need some stability, we need to develop
to measure health outcomes.
And the pendulum continues to shift and change.
We you in delivering services can't really pitch your tent
and commit the relevant resources for your rural community.
Absolutely, and I think I would refer the committee
to work by Sarek
and Kath Savage, where they talked about the impact of Maori
and iwi checkpoints during the COVID years.
Because what we saw was that the projected trajectory of,
um, disease and death that was, uh, akin to
what would've been, uh, expected in the 1918 flu in,
in a flu epidemic
where Maori were disproportionately overrepresented in
mortality states, the work
of the Iwi Maori Wano Water Network.
In reversing that trend
and being able to have less, um, presentations of COVID
to being able to keep people well
and to sustain wellbeing amongst communities,
we must build on that mo you know,
that mobilization build on that what works And uh,
and that's what we've seen with the whole development
of PY water and wana water building on what works continues
to improve, uh, longevity of life.
Whereas when you chop
and change, you change the nature of what we expect, uh,
then, uh, people lose confidence and,
and the health system suffers.
Alright, thank you Helen for your submission.
Now next one we got aa, uh, Doctora Edwards.
Oh, Kia, Kia,
Dr. AA Edwards.
Um, I just wanna say that I've recently,
I'm still writing up an article ONA that I actually did
for on tuberculosis
and I, you know, um, the exposure
of clinical colonization of infectious diseases
and is disturbing
and our people have been institutionalized, stripped of wa
and denied their oranga.
And I'm really tired of from this
coalition's amendments and bills be, um, having to come here
and repeat the same thing.
So I make no apology at coming from a Maori platform.
So I utterly oppose this bill
because it strips away, um, strips away
Maori authority, undermines
and entrenches in equities that have already cost lives.
Um, the part, the act, the amendments
or no, the current act was built on equity partnership
in Maori representation.
This amendment removes those principles
and repels the health charter
and reduces iwi Maori partnership boards to advisory roles.
Advisory is not, um,
partnership consultation is not breaches.
Article 11, which guarantees us Maori authority,
article three promises equity,
it's weakening these commitments
as a retreat in the treaty principles.
Maori already faced poorer health outcomes
and shorter life expectancies.
My oldest brother died of multiple myeloma
at the age of 55.
My father died at the age of 70.
And sometimes you actually reflect
and you just wonder what,
what this is about being an in Maori health.
So diluting equity means widening these gaps.
Equity is not optional, it is a right.
The build dismantles Maori leadership pushes us out
of the deci decision making spaces.
Um, it will damage trust, disengaged whanau,
and entrenched systemic failure for decades.
And that's what we're trying to address prior
to this coalition.
So the bottom line is, uh, there are no remedies, no tweaks.
Maori have been thrown under the bus too many times.
Um, the only option is to withdraw this bill.
If parliament is serious about RA
or healthy futures, then honors uphold equity
and protect Maori leadership in health.
Um, again, um, we need to be able to reclaim our space
and is remedies
and that was asserting those in the tuberculosis
or infectious diseases.
Um, they won't be defeated, um, by compliance,
but Maori leadership, TU and health systems built on justice
and hu just said it
before, um, that we actually,
everything is on a political short term.
You know, one minute we're doing this next we're doing that.
But at the, the importance of it is UA
and I make no apology for that, that thing.
Alright, thank you for your submission.
Do we have any questions? Yes, Johana.
Oh, I'll stand down for fire. Debbie.
Oh, Debbie, here we go.
I didn't realize, I thought we could both have questions.
Thank you so much. Um, I agree with everything you said.
I guess the, um, in your experience as a researcher
and, um, knowing the, in the to
and fro, what are, what is it that you see
the opportunity missing, um, the country,
if the government goes down this path, what is it
that you believe that we needed to be investing in
and focusing on?
And if you had their ear, you would ask
that they go this way, not that way.
Um, I think what Hua said, so long-term planning
that they, that, um, we all agree and it's untouchable, um,
because we, we get thrown around as Maori
and I focus on Maori,
but I suppose at the end of the day, I want them to listen.
You know, don't it, it's all about politics.
I didn't even know, I think this was written by, um,
Simeon Brown and I don't think he's got any
knowledge at all in health.
And we have to come on here.
And I've, I've done a lot of submission, um,
to the select committee and it's, that is getting discover.
I've never known so many, but health is really important.
And I wanna say a message. I lost my brother at 55.
I lost my father at 70.
You know, my, my other family members are doctors
also within the health.
And it's the same thing.
I dunno what we, you know, I dunno how often we have
to say it, but stop tweaking our health
because you tweak that or you make us and dismiss it
or make us invisible when you know
that this is just a political move to raise us.
Um, that's the impact of it.
So I want my children to live longer. I want to live longer.
I want my children, my,
and my to be able to have healthy futures.
So I don't know if that answered your question.
Debbie, thank you. Thank
You. Thank you so much. I
think the time is up.
Uh, thank you so much for your submission. And one
Free Palestine. Free
Palestine Free Palestine. Next
One, we got submission, honor
Free Palestine, Tracy Martin
Sanctions Now thank you sanctions.
Now,
Uh, thank you very much to the committee
for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today.
Um, I'm Tracy Martin.
I'm the Chief Executive of the Aged Care Association.
We represent around about,
well we represent almost a hundred percent of New Zealand's,
uh, age residential care providers.
So that's roundabout 670 facilities,
39,000 care beds across charitable not-for-profits,
faith-based, family owned and private providers.
You will have read our written submission,
so I'm not gonna repeat what we put in there,
but I wanna focus on four things
that we believe are absolutely critical if this bill is
going to deliver meaningful change for older New Zealanders
and for the health system.
So the first is recognition.
Right now the bill hardly mentions older people
or age residential care, and yet this part of the system is
and will increasingly have a massive impact on hospital flow
and on the wellbeing of our older citizens.
So we are asking you the committee to make, um, to make
that recognition explicit in the purpose clause,
which is clause three
and the planning clause, which is clause 13
and commissioning, which is clause 14,
and in reporting requirements, which is clause 23.
The second point is system flow.
This bill is an opportunity
to line up the government's priorities on seven day
discharge and freeing up hospital beds.
Age residential care is a key part of that solution.
We need age residential care to be hardwired into discharge
and step down pathways,
which is addressed could be addressed in clause 14.
So older people don't end up getting stuck in hospital beds
longer than they need to be.
Third planning
and targets right now there's no requirement to plan
for standard non-premium bed availability, rural access
or dementia and psychogeriatric capacity.
We know that there are shortages
and long wait lists in exactly these areas.
So we'd like to see Health New Zealand be required under
clause clause 13 to plan for these.
And under clause 14, to work with the ARC providers
to deliver capacity
and to publish measurable targets
for these CRI critical services so
that progress can be measured.
And fourth, infrastructure, we need a clear signal
that age residential care will be treated as part
of the national health infrastructure.
Nearly half of our facilities are more than 40 years old.
Many of them are struggling to stay compliant
because maintenance has been deferred for years
and rural communities are already losing services.
If we don't act, we fa we will face even longer wait times,
which are already six months for dementia
and psychogeriatric care and more service closures.
And this is smart investment.
Even if hospital level arc beds were funded at their actual
cost of around about $600 a day,
they would still deliver a three to one saving compared
with a hospital bed at $1,800 a day.
This should be explicitly recognized in clause 13,
the objectives and clause 14, the functions Mr Chair,
40% of older New Zealanders live on superannuation alone
and another 20% on superannuation
and just a little bit more.
These New Zealanders are increasingly unable
to access care without paying a premium charge
or an occupational right lump sum.
And this pressure will continue to grow
and very quickly by 2040 there will be more than 200,000 New
Zealanders, aged 85
and over with a quarter of them needing residential care.
This means we'll need between 13,000
and 19,000 more care beds just
to meet the demand for that age group.
And that's even before we account for the under 80 fives
who will also need care or a recovery
and return home service or respite services.
Equity is also a geographic issue.
Communities like Reef
and much of the west coast have no local arc provision
or very limited provision.
This forces people to move away from their communities.
It cuts them off from their loved ones and visitors
and it leaves them lonely and disconnected.
We ask the committee to strengthen the purpose clause
to include older people and require quality, timely
and equitable access
to residential care wherever people live.
Mr Chair, our psychogeriatric facilities are some
of the oldest in the network yet this is
where we are seeing growth in some
of the most challenging needs, including more residents
with alcohol and drug related dementias,
which often results in violent behaviors.
This puts other staff
and other residents under extreme pressure and real risk.
We need Health New Zealand to plan for capacity,
not just nationally but regionally
and to work with providers to make sure
that beds are available when and where people need them.
This could be achieved by strengthening clauses 13 and 14.
We support stronger planning and monitoring in this bill,
but it needs teeth.
We'd like to see Health New Zealand required under clause 23
to publish regional arc capacity plans every year,
report on median wait times
and show the number of hospital nights saved
through arc placements.
That transparency will let Parliament
and the public see whether we are moving
in the right direction.
And yet we know there's one thing
that's really missing here, Mr.
Chair, inside this bill, it's completely absent.
So we know that a 100% of our citizens
and residents in this country will die.
Yet this bill completely misses the opportunity to ensure
that palliative care is explicitly recognized as a core part
of the health system that Health New Zealand must
plan for and deliver.
Palliative care is essential, not just at the end of life,
but across the continuum of care for people with complex
and life limiting conditions.
It relieves pressures on hospitals, supports families
and whanau, and allows people to die with dignity,
often closer to home.
We encourage the committee
to consider inserting a specific reference
to palliative care within the bill's objectives
and planning requirements so that access, capacity
and service quality are measured and improved over time.
So in summary, in our context, this bill is a good step,
but we suggest you be bolder.
Older New Zealanders must be explicitly recognized.
Infrastructure investment must include ARC
as critical health infrastructure and sys.
And the system must be held accountable for ensuring
that older people can access care close to home, connected
to whanau and when they need it.
That's how we'll free up hospital capacity support seven day
discharge and deliver on the promise
of Piora healthy futures for everyone.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
I am happy to take any questions.
Thank you Chay, we've got question from Johana.
Uh, thank you Auntie Tracy. I'm Mahi.
Um, I'd like to recognize your work and advocacy
and being our for the inquiry into aged care facilities
and cognitive disorders, um,
but also your targeted recommendations that you've provided
because it sets out, you know, some tangible things
that we can consider in terms of our recommendations.
Um, the issue around equity, timely
and quality health service.
You've kind of introduced some of those issues in terms
of some rural populations.
Do you think that there are urban spaces too that we have,
um, gaps that you are seeing in terms of the provision
of these ARC services, both rural as well as urban?
Absolutely. So that they're both equity issues,
but they're both, they both manifest in different ways.
So in our urban areas, we just don't have the capacity.
I was in Auckland last week speaking to, um, a lot of, uh,
providers up there in Auckland
and um, if you can't afford a premium
or an occupational rights um, agreement,
then you have got a really hard job finding somewhere
that when you've been assessed as needing care,
because let's be, let's be honest, nobody chooses
to go into residential care.
They need to go into residential care
because they require the level of support.
So in an urban area, there's just lack
of capacity in a rural area.
I think possibly it's even more cruel, which is
that we are separating families and loved ones.
I'll give you an example of a gentleman on the west coast
whose wife, they've been married something like
60, 65 years.
His wife suffers from dementia
and requires a secure care facility.
The closest secure care facility is four hours
away every morning.
This gentleman who they're both in their eighties,
this gentleman gets up and drives to see the woman he loves.
He will not stop doing that,
but he is driven off the road three times
already during this trip.
So we are doing that to families, we are doing that
to couples and we can do better.
Sure. Thank you Tracy for your submission
and thank you for your continued advocacy
to our senior visit resident as well.
Um, your hard work is, is uh, uh, we,
we admire your hard work.
Um, so I think this is for now, I think we got a break, uh,
lunch break for now and we will see, uh, if one back to the,
uh, to the public meeting at one o'clock.